Website https://delhitourism.travel/chandni-chowk-delhi
The Chandni Chowk is one of the oldest and busiest markets in Old Delhi, India. It is located close to the Old Delhi Railway Station. The Red Fort monument is located at the eastern end of Chandni Chowk. It was built in the 17th century by the Mughal Emperor, Shah Jahan, and designed by his daughter, Jahanara. The market was once divided by canals (now closed) to reflect moonlight. It remains one of India's largest wholesale markets.[1][2]
History[edit]
Procession of the Emperor Bahadur Shah II on Eid in Chandni Chowk in 1843.
Existing Delhi Town Hall (Municipal Hall) at Chandni Chowk, with a statue of Swami Shraddhanand in front.
The market's history dates to the founding of the capital city of Shahjahanabad when Emperor Shah Jahan established the Red Fort on the banks of the Yamuna River besides his new capital.
Original Chandni Chowk[edit]
Jahanara Begum's caravanserai that formed the original Chandni Chowk, from Sir Thomas Theophilus Metcalf's 1843 album.
Chandni Chowk in the 1860s.
The original Chandni Chowk, half-moon-shaped square, was located in front of the Municipal Townhall and its reflection used to shine in the moonlit water pool located in front of it. A shallow water channel was built from Yamuna, which ran through the middle of the straight road currently known as the Chandani Chowk bazaar, with roads and shops on either side of the channel. This road had three bazaars.[3] Chandni Chowk, or the Moonlight Square, and its three bazaars were designed and established by Princess Jahanara Begum, Shah Jahan's favourite daughter, in 1650 CE. Originally containing 1,560 shops, the bazaar was 40 yards wide by 1,520 yards long.[4] The bazaar shaped as a square was given elegance by the presence of a pool in the centre of the complex. The pool shimmered in the moonlight, a feature which was responsible for its name.[5] Shops were originally built in a half-moon shaped pattern, now lost. The bazaar was famous for its silver merchants, which also have contributed to the name of "Silver Street"[6] as silver is referred to as Chandi in Hindi, a slight variation of which forms Chandni.
The pool in the chowk was replaced by a clock tower (Ghantaghar) in the 1870s. The centre of the market is still referred to as Ghantaghar. Chandni Chowk was once the grandest Indian market.[7] Mughal imperial processions passed through Chandni Chowk. The tradition was continued when the Delhi Durbar was held in 1903. Delhi Town Hall was built in 1863 by the British.
Original three bazaars[edit]
Shahjahanabad: Chowk bazaar as a horizontal street in the centre of the walled city marked in the red, half-moon shaped moonlight Chandani Chowk square itself was located in front of the Municipal Hall. Equi-divided one-third sections of the road represent three bazaars, Urdu Bazaar, Johri Bazaar and Fatehpuri Bazar. c. 1911.
The term Chandni Chowk originally referred only to the square that had a reflecting pool. Now the whole straight road which runs through the middle of the walled city, from the Lahori Gate of the Red Fort to Fatehpuri Masjid is called Chandni Chowk. The road was then divided into three following bazaars:[8][3]
Urdu Bazar: Lahori Gate of the Mughal royal palace to Chowk Kotwali near Gurudwara Sis Ganj Sahib was called Urdu Bazaar, i.e., the encampment market. The Urdu language received its name from this encampment. Ghalib noted the destruction of this market during the disturbances of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and its aftermath.
Johri Bazar: Chowk Kotwali to Chandni Chowk (location of now demolished Ghantaghar, presently in front of Municipal/Town Hall) section of the straight road was originally called Johri Bazar.
Fatehpuri Bazar: 'Chandni Chowk' to Fatehpuri Masjid section of the straight road was originally called the Fatehpuri Bazar.
Now choked with congestion, the market retains its historical character.[9]
Naughara mansions in Kinari Bazaar
Kucha, katra and havelis[edit]
The road now called Chandni Chowk had several streets running off it which were called kuchas (streets/wings). Each Kucha usually had several katras (cul de sac or guild houses), which in turn had several haveli's. The following terms are generally used to describe the buildings and the streets:[9]
Mohalla (neighborhood): is a residential neighbourhood with Kuchas and Kartras within Kuchas.[10]
Kucha or Gali (street): Kucha in the Persian language is synonymous with "Gali" or street in the Hindi language. It is a street or a zone with houses whose owners shared some common attributes, usually their occupation. Hence the names Kucha Maliwara (the gardeners' street) and Kucha Ballimaran (the oarsmen's street). Kuchas either had rows of large Havelis or gated cul de sac (dead end) "Katra" marketplaces along with them.[3]
Kucha mahajani: is one of the biggest gold-trading hubs and wholesale jewellery markets in Asia.[11]
Katra (gated cul-de-sac courtyard market-cum-residential complex in a street): are one-room quarters around a court with a single narrow entrance and inhabited by people of the same caste or occupation i.e. a zone with houses whose owners shared some common attribute, usually their occupation, hence the name.[10] Katra refers to a separate wing of tradesmen and craftsmen belonging to the same trade. They usually lived and worked together in a gated cul de sac, the doors of which could be closed at night for the protection of the merchandise, equipment, workers and their families. It is a system similar to the guild housing in Amsterdam such as Handboogdoelen and Voetboogdoelen.[3]
Haveli (mansion): A normal haveli has a big courtyard (atrium) surrounded on four sides by spacious rooms and often another walled courtyard around the exterior. Historic havelis include:[12][13][3]
Begum Samru's palace built in 1806, now called Bhagirath Palace, see.[14]
Dharampura Haveli, Gali Guliyan, designed in late Mughal style although parts show the influence of 20 Century architecture. During Mughal and late Mughal Period, a large numbers of Havelis were built by courtiers.[15] With increasing interest in Old Delhi by tourists, and to revive the old world charm of Purani Dilli, Haveli Dharmpura houses an Indian restaurant serving specialities of Mughal era with a contemporary touch, which you can enjoy with classical dance.
Chunnamal haveli in Katra Neel
Ghalib ki Haveli of Mirza Ghalib, Gali Qasim Jan (Gali Ballimaran)
Haksar Haveli in Sita Ram Bazar, where Jawaharlal Nehru was married on 8 February 1916 to Kamla Nehru. She was born here, and her family sold it in the 1960s. Haveli used to host mushairas[16]
Haveli Banarsi Bhawan with a water well is situated near to Shree Digambar Meru Jain Temple in the Masjid Khajoor area.
Haveli Naharwali, Kucha Sadullah Khan, where Pervez Musharraf, former president of Pakistan was born and his grandfather sold it to Prem Chand Gola after whom this area is now called Gola Market.[17] This was originally owned by the Raja Nahar Khan a Hindu convert of Mewat who converted to Islam during the era of Firuz Shah Tughlaq in 1355, hence the name.[10]
Khazanchi haveli, the Khajanchi were the accountants of Shah Jahan. A street is named after them called "Gali Khajanchi", a long tunnel connects the haveli and the Red Fort, so that money could be transferred safely. It is close to the entrance of Chandni Chowk, from the Red Fort walk towards Fatehpuri, turn left on road to Dariba and the haveli is at the end of the road that connects Dariba and Esplanade Road.[18]
Haveli Raja Jugal Kishore, a grand mansion with an imposing gate, which was adorned with a large ghanta-bell. Located adjacent to the gate, a room in the haveli opening towards the street, was given to Lala Sukhlal by the owners of the haveli as a philanthropic gesture to open a sweet shop, which came to be identified as ghante ke neechewala halwaii. (see Ghantewala). A street is named after the haveli; Kucha-i-Haveli Raja Jugal Kishore between Kucha Maliwara and Kotwali Chabutra.
Naughara Mansions in Naughara Gali off Kinari Bazaar has 18th century Jain mansions. It is a street with nine (nau) continuous havelies with brightly painted floral designs on the facade. Each of the havelies used to have a gharha (water pot) placed at door for the thirsty passersby. There is a white marble Jain Svetambara Temple at the end of the street with stone elephant heads at the door, intricate carvings on walls and pillars, a museum on the ground floor with rare manuscripts embroidered in pure gold and silver threads and a black image of Lord Parasanath in the rare kasauti stone on the first floor. Office of Atma Prakash Aggrawal at the beginning of the street houses numerous antiques and should not be mistaken as an antique shop.[19][20]
Zeenat Mahal Haveli, Lal Kuan Bazar
Some other commonly used terms are Chatta (the upper floor which arches over the street below), phatak (door, usually to a katra or street which could be locked at night), mahal (a palace, as in Taj Mahal), kamra (a room), kuan is waterwell, etc.[10]
Historic religious buildings[edit]
Lal Jain Mandir and Gauri Shankar temple in the background
Delhi's most famous mosque, Jama Masjid, built-in 1650 in the vicinity, is near other religious shrines, belonging to multiple religions. Starting from the Red Fort, the buildings include:
The Sri Digambar Jain Lal Mandir, established in 1656 with a bird hospital established in 1929. A Naya Mandir was built in 1807 in Dharampura, as the first temple with a Shikhar.
The Gauri Shankar Temple[21] was built by a Maratha general Appa Gangadhar according to one of the legends.
The Central Baptist Church, it was built-in 1814.
The Gurdwara Sis Ganj Sahib. The ninth Sikh Guru, Guru Tegh Bahadur and his followers Bhai Mati Das, Bhai Dyal Das and Bhai Sati Das were executed nearby by the Mughals in 1675. The Gurudwaras in the form of memorials were built in 1783 after Delhi, the then Mughal capital was captured by the Khalsa (the corporate body of Sikhs) under the command of Baghel Singh. Present Building was however built later in 1930.
The Sunehri Masjid was built in 1721 by Roshan-Ud-Daula Zafar Khan in the reign of Mohammad Shah. Persian invader Nader Shah spent several hours on the top of the mosque on 11 March 1739 to observe the Katl-e-Aam (the killing of everyone in sight) that he had ordered, which resulted in 30,000 deaths.
The Fatehpuri Masjid was built by Fatehpuri Begum in 1650, one of the queens of Shah Jahan.
Present[edit]
On both sides of the wide Chandni Chowk are historical residential areas served by narrow lanes (gali), several of which are teeming with the peddlers, street vendors, street food and bazaars.
Shops[edit]
Chawri Bazar, full of activity
Food shop on Khari Baoli Road
Chandni Chowk's speciality is its variety and authenticity: food, delicacies and sweets of more than 1,000 kinds, sarees with chikan and zari. Narrow lanes host shops that sell books, clothing, electronics, consumer goods, shoes and leather goods. It is the location of the original Haldiram's and brands such as Giani's.[22] A particular local delicacy is the jalebis, which are fried in pure ghee (clarified butter).
Starting from the Red Fort end one finds the State Bank of India building. A short distance away is Bhagirath Palace Begum Samru[23] which has an intriguing history. Bhagirath Palace and the adjoining area have perhaps the biggest market in India for electrical goods, lamps and light fixtures.Also for medical essentials and related products.Dariba Kalan is the market for silver and gold jewellery. This market also offers trophies, shields, mementos and related items. At its Southern end (and close to the Jama Masjid, Delhi) is Bazaar Guliyan where about a hundred shops selling metallic and wooden statues, sculptures, bells, handicrafts are located. Nai Sarak is the wholesale market for stationery, books, paper and decorative materials. Chawri Bazar is a big market for greeting and wedding cards as well as plumbing and sanitary ware and accessories. Lal Kuan is a wholesale market for hardware and hotel kitchen equipment. Located at the western end of Chandni Chowk, Khari Baoli is a street entirely dedicated to all kinds of spices, dried fruits, nuts, herbs, grains, lentils, pickles and preserves/murabbas. Tilak Bazaar is a wholesale market for industrial chemicals. The Cloth Market supplies home furnishing fabrics, including ready-made items as well as design services.
Restaurants and eateries[edit]
Chandni Chowk is home to several notable restaurants and halwais (confectioners), most well known among them is Gali Paranthe Wali.[24]
Paranthewali Gali with paratha shops from 1875 to 1886.[25]
Annapurna Bhandar established in 1929 by Late Mr.Purna Chander Modak[26] is popular for Bengali sweets.
Bikaner Sweet Shop, known for rasmalai.
Chaatwallah, established in 1923, known for fruit chaat.
Chaina Ram Sindhi Halwai, established in 1948 serves besan ke laddoo, ghee patisa and ghevar like none in the city.[27]
Giani's, serving icecreams and Rabri Falooda, established around 1947.
Gol Hatti, established in 1954, serves kullhad wale chhole chawal.
Hazari Lal Khurchan Wale, Kinaari Bazaar. This shop, established 90 years ago, arguably makes the best khurchan in Delhi. Khurchan means ”scraped leftovers" in Hindi. The preparation sounds simple: boil the milk, scrape off the cream as it appears on the top, and eventually mix it with bhoora, or powdered sugar.[28]
Kanwarji Bhagirathmal Dalbijiwallah established in the mid-19th century.
Meghraj and Sons, since the 1950s
Natraj's Dahi Bhalle, established in 1940.
Shiv Mishtan Bhandar, established 1910, is well known for their bedmi pooree with aloo sabzi with crisp jalebi or imarti. A limited menu but every item is freshly prepared and full of flavour.[29]
Tewari Brothers Confectioners, (known for Motichoor Laddoo, Samosa) established in 1987
The Old Famous Jalebi Wala, which is situated in Dariba Kalan, serves city's crispiest jalebis.[30]
In popular culture[edit]
Chandni Chowk was featured in the 2001 Bollywood film Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham where the leading lady Anjali (Kajol) and her sister Pooja (Kareena Kapoor) lived.
In 2008, The Bollywood movie Black & White starring Anil Kapoor, Anurag Sinha, Shefali Chhaya, and Aditi Sharma is set in Chandni Chowk.
In 2009, The Bollywood movie Chandni Chowk to China starring Akshay Kumar, Deepika Padukone, Mithun Chakraborty, and Ranvir Shorey features some scenes depicting the city. In 2009, The Bollywood movie Delhi-6 starring Abhishek Bachchan, Sonam Kapoor, Waheeda Rehman, Om Puri, Atul Kulkarni and Divya Dutta had its shooting in the ancient Walled City of Old Delhi, centered around Chandni Chowk.
In 2016, The Bollywood movie Saat Uchakkey starring Manoj Bajpayee, Kay Kay Menon, Annu Kapoor, Vijay Raaz, Anupam Kher, Jatin Sarna, Aparshakti Khurana and Aditi Sharma was completely shot in and around Chandni Chowk.
In 2018, the Bollywood movie Rajma Chawal starring Amyra Dastur, Rishi Kapoor, Aparshakti Khurana, Raja Hasan, Mukesh Chhabra, Nirmal Rishi, Harish Khanna had its extensive section of the film shot in Lachu Ram Ki Haveli.[31]
In 2019, the Bollywood movie The Sky Is Pink starring Priyanka Chopra, Farhan Akhtar, Zaira Wasim, Rohit Suresh Saraf was partially shot in Chandni Chowk as the main characters of the story, Priyanka and Farhan lived here.[32]
Redevelopment[edit]
Chandni Chowk heritage walk starts from Red Fort
Chandni Chowk State Bank of India
Central Baptist Church
Gurudwara Sis Ganj Sahib
Fatehpuri Mosque, the end of Heritage walk
Chandni Chowk was redeveloped as heritage trail to promote tourism getting inspiration from Heritage Street Amritsar.[33] Shahjahanabad Redevelopment Corporation, under the auspices of the Government of the NCT of Delhi, is the agency carrying out this task. The redevelopment plan includes footpaths to make the area more pedestrian-friendly for a large number of shoppers and visitors. No motorized traffic will be allowed on Chandni Chowk from Red Fort to Fatehpuri Masjid in the day time. Roads are also planned to be decongested and some will be barricaded. People who want to come there will have to use the Ebus. The redevelopment plan was supposed to have been completed before the 2010 Commonwealth Games but has been delayed for various reasons. Delhi government is now pushing it seriously. The redevelopment plan is being implemented under Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia. The Plan also includes extra parking for 1500 cars.
As a part of the redevelopment, a multilevel parking cum commercial complex is coming up at Gandhi Maidan in Chandni Chowk. The project was inaugurated by Union minister of science and technology, Dr. Harshvardhan.[34]
This multilevel parking cum commercial complex would be an eight-storeyed building with three basements covering 18,524 square meter area at a cost of Rs 1,000 crore on a PPP model with a Leading Real estate developer Omaxe. The project that has a capacity to accommodate over 2,300 cars.[35]

Connaught Place is a place name of various places in the world:
Connaught Place, New Delhi in Delhi, India
Connaught Place (Hong Kong) in Central, Hong Kong
Connaught Place, London in London, England
This disambiguation page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name.
If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.
Airport Express Line
An elevated stretch of the Airport line.
Overview
Other name(s) Orange Line
Status Operational
Owner Delhi Metro
Locale New Delhi, India
Termini
New Delhi
Yashobhoomi Dwarka Sector - 25
Stations 7
Service
Type Airport Express Train
System Rapid Transit
Operator(s) Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
Rolling stock CAF
Daily ridership 82,000 (Jan 2019)[1]
History
Opened 23 February 2011
Closed 7 July 2012
Reopened 22 January 2013
Technical
Line length 22.7 km (14.1 mi)
Character At-grade, Underground, and Elevated
Track gauge 1,435 mm (4 ft 8
+
1⁄2 in) standard gauge
Electrification 25 kV 50 Hz AC overhead catenary
Operating speed 120 km/h (75 mph)
show
Route map
The Airport Express Line or Orange Line is a Delhi Metro line from New Delhi to Yashobhoomi Dwarka Sector - 25, linking Indira Gandhi International Airport. The total length of the line is 22.7 km (14.1 mi),[2] of which 15.7 km (9.8 mi) is underground[3] and 7.0 km (4.3 mi), from Buddha Jayanti Park to Mahipalpur, elevated.[4]
On 27 June 2013 Reliance Infrastructure Ltd. informed DMRC of their inability to operate the line beyond 30 June 2013.[5] Following this, DMRC took over operations of Airport Express line from 1 July 2013 with an operations and maintenance team of 100 officials to handle the line.[6]
The line runs at a speed of 120 km/h (75 mph) providing for a 15-minute journey from New Delhi to IGI Airport.[7][8] In 2023, the operational speed of Delhi Airport Express was increased to 120 km/h (75 mph) from 110 km/h (68 mph), making it the fastest metro line in the country. [9]
History[edit]
Main articles: Reliance Infrastructure and Delhi Metro
The first tenders for line construction were awarded in September 2007.[10] On 23 January 2008, the DMRC awarded a 30-year build-operate-transfer PPP contract to the Reliance Energy-CAF consortium.[11] However, DMRC paid for half of the construction cost and executed tunneling and civil works.[11]
It was built at a cost of ₹ 57 billion,[12] of which Reliance Infra paid ₹ 28.85 billion (U$580m),[13] Reliance Infra will also pay fees on a Revenue-share model[12][14]
The elevated section of the Airport Express Line was built over eight busy roads which carry a heavy volume of traffic, including the Ring Road, National Highway 48, Ridge Road and Sardar Patel Marg.[15][16]
Originally scheduled to open by 31 August 2010, well in time for the 2010 Commonwealth Games, the line finally opened on 23 February 2011 at 2 pm[17] after missing four previously set deadlines.[18] The DMRC fined Reliance Infra ₹ 37.5 lakh every day from 30 September, and ₹ 75 lakh every day from 31 October for repeatedly missing the deadlines.[18] The Aerocity and Dhaula Kuan stations opened on 15 August 2011.
Services were suspended on 8 July 2012 due to a series of technical problems,[19] including cracks in the girders, the iron beams that support the tracks; dislocated bearings that support the train; defective tracks and water seepage in tunnels.[20] The Urban Development Ministry subsequently disclosed that several clips in the underground section have been seriously damaged and it will take at least 5 months to rectify the problem.[21] A joint inspection by Delhi Metro and Reliance Infrastructure team has revealed that 540 bearings need rectification and some girders which have cracked also need to be recast.[22]
The line reopened on 23 January 2013, operating at a reduced speed of 50 km/h (31 mph). At the reduced speed the time travel from New Delhi Metro Station to Airport was around 40–50 minutes. After inspection by the DMRC and various other experts, in mid-2014, DMRC reinstated 100 km/h speeds on the line.[23]
At the original speed of 100 km/h (62 mph), the journey from New Delhi Metro Station to Airport takes just 20 minutes.
In 2022, the DMRC decided to increase the operating speed from 100km/h (62 mph to 110km/h (68 mph) by 2023 reducing travel time from the current 20 minutes to less than 15 minutes.[24]
On 17 September 2023, the Dwarka Sector 25 metro station opened to the public, extending the Airport Express Line two kilometers into the India International Convention and Expo Centre (also known as Yashobhoomi), which opened on the same day. The station is underground within the new convention center, with entrances providing a quick connection to current and future exhibition halls as well as an indoor arena, among other attractions at the new convention center.[25]
Map[edit]
Stations[edit]
Main article: List of Delhi Metro stations
New Delhi metro station
Delhi Airport Express Line stations
# Station Name Opening Interchange Connection Station Layout Depot Connection Depot Layout
English Hindi
1 New Delhi नई दिल्ली 23 February 2011 Yellow Line
New Delhi Railway Station Underground None None
2 Shivaji Stadium शिवाजी स्टेडियम 23 February 2011 None Underground None None
3 Dhaula Kuan धौला कुआँ 15 August 2011 Pink Line Elevated None None
4 Delhi Aerocity दिल्ली एरोसिटी 15 August 2011 Golden Line
(Phase 4 - Under Construction) Underground None None
5 IGI Airport आईजीआई एअरपोर्ट 23 February 2011 IGI Airport Underground None None
6 Dwarka Sector 21 द्वारका सेक्टर २१ 23 February 2011 Blue Line Underground Dwarka Sector 21 Depot At Grade
7 Yashobhoomi Dwarka Sector - 25 यशोभूमि द्वारका सेक्टर - २५ 17 September 2023 None Underground None None
All the six metro stations on the line are known as City Airport Terminals (CATs). They are fitted with state-of-the-art gadgets like explosive detectors, large x-ray baggage scanners, under vehicle scanners, quick reaction teams and dog squads to ensure full security of commuters and baggage alike. The stations have full-height platform screen doors to prevent untoward incidents and to provide better air conditioning. All the stations are secured with a network of CCTV cameras which relays live images to the station control room, security control room and operations control centre. The security of the airport line is handled by Central Industrial Security Force who also handles the safety of all the stations of DMRC.
All the stations are disabled friendly so that people on wheelchairs can access them with facilities such as stations with ramps having a mild slope leading to elevators, the elevators are specially designed for the convenience of physically challenged people and capable of carrying stretchers, help call points are located at various points of stations and trains so that in case of any emergency, a disabled person can seek help by just pressing the call buttons. The elevators can be used by visually impaired persons with the elevator buttons having Braille letters.[26]
Operations[edit]
While it was initially planned to run trains 24 hours a day with a frequency of 10 minutes, train services, as of 2024, operate from 5:00 am to 11:40 pm (from New Delhi),[27] with a peak 10-minute frequency, and a non-peak 15-minute frequency.
While originally expected to carry 42,000 people daily by 2011 as per detailed project report prepared by DMRC, actual ridership has hovered around 20,000.[28] Within a few years, due to several initiative and fare reduction by the DMRC, ridership crossed 50,000 per day.[1]
Fare[edit]
The fare for commuting has been fixed at ₹60 (75¢ US) for travel from New Delhi metro station to IGI Airport / Dwarka Sector 21.[29] There are also passes available for 30 and 45 trips costing ₹1,600 (US$20) and ₹2,000 (US$25) respectively for travelling from New Delhi to IGI Airport.[29] This keeps the per trip cost at ₹53.33 (67¢ US) and ₹44.44 (56¢ US) respectively and are valid for one calendar month. There are other such passes available for different origin destination combinations. Stored Value cards are also on offer which will give 10% discount on all the trips. These airport express fares are cheaper than any other modes of transport to reach airport.[30]
Infrastructure[edit]
Siemens Mobility is providing signalling, power transmission, and baggage handling system enabling passengers to check in with baggage at the New Delhi metro station and Shivaji Stadium, with 1200 passengers per hour capacity.[31][32] The €34 million project was expected to be completed by 2010 in time for the Commonwealth games but it did not manage to meet the deadline. Alcatel is supplying the communications systems.[13] Indra Sistemas is providing the ticket machines. Faiveley is providing the platform screen doors. Bluestar and Honeywell is the control and automation provider for Station Management System (SMS). Bluestar is the main BEMS system provider.
The line will be the first line in the country to be mapped on Geographic Information System to enhance safety, maintenance and traffic regulation and will help in mobilising emergency services in case of an accident.[33] In April 2020, DMRC published a notice for procuring a SCADA System at the line's Operational Control Centre (OCC)[34]
Rolling stock[edit]
Inside an Airport Express train
Board showing next station in Delhi Airport Metro Express
Eight six-car trains supplied by CAF Beasain were imported from Spain.[2] CAF holds 5% equity in DAMEPL, a holding company Spice Commerce and Trade Pvt. Ltd. holds 65% equity and Reliance Infrastructure holds the remaining 30%.[13] The trains on this line are of a premium standard and have in-built noise reduction features for a noise-free ride with padded fabric seats. The trains are fitted with an event recorder which can withstand high levels of temperature and impact and the wheels have flange lubrication system for less noise and better riding comfort.[33]
Based on the consultancy by MTR, the interior design of the rolling stock is highly similar to that of Hong Kong's Airport Express line, which uses very similar trains.
Tracks[edit]
To ensure safety, the tracks are fitted with RHEDA-2000 signalling technology, which theoretically allows trains to travel at up to 350 km/h (nearly three times the actual maximum speed of current trains).[35] The entire 22.7 km route is ballast-less track, which costs 40–50% more than normal train tracks, but does not take longer to lay than traditional tracks. The rails rest on rubber pads on the concrete sleepers for less noise.[35]
The 7 km elevated section from Buddha Jayanti Park to Mahipalpur has been built with 25 m long girders for the first time in India.[4] The 504 girders weigh 120 tons each and were cast in Mahipalpur and transported on 35 m long trailers with 64 tyres.[4]
Check-in and cloak room facility[edit]
The line has the first check in facility outside an airport in South Asia.
Passengers flying with Air India and Vistara which use T3 terminal as base of operations can check in at the New Delhi Metro Station. The check-in can be done anytime before 6 hours to 2 and half hours before departure time. Passengers flying for international flights also started checking in as this facility from 22 February 2012, however that has been stopped since COVID.
Cloak room facilities are available as well, with rates beginning at Rs 50 for the first 4 hours for luggage weighing less than 20 kilograms, to Rs 350 for 24 hours for luggage weighing more than 30 kilograms.[36]
Smartphone as ticket[edit]
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has introduced QR code-based ticketing facility for travel on Airport Express Line from September 2018.[37] The system will enable passengers to purchase tickets using 'Ridlr mobile App' without physically coming to the metro station. Airport Line stations even have QR-enabled entry and exit gates for commuters.
WiFi service[edit]
The Airport Express line introduced WiFi services at all six stations along the route on 13 January 2012. It was the first line of the Delhi Metro to provide WiFi services. Connectivity inside metro trains travelling on the route is expected in the future. The WiFi service is provided by YOU Broadband India Limited.[38]
Post office[edit]
The post office will have all basic postal services like speed post, e-post, express parcel, registered post, postal stamps and revenue stamps on all working days from 10 am to 4 pm.[39]
Postal services can be availed by both commuters and non-commuters as the counter is located at the non-paid area of New Delhi metro station's concourse level.[39]
Movie shooting and promotional venue[edit]
Ever since Shah Rukh Khan boarded the Airport Express line to promote "Ra.One", the new line has become the cynosure of most Bollywood promotions in the capital. Actor Abhishek Bachchan, along with co-stars Sonam Kapoor and Neil Nitin Mukesh headed to the Airport line to promote his movie "Players" in Delhi, and also attempted to break a safe while travelling from one station of the Airport line to another.
Promotions
SRK for 'Ra.One' - Airport Express
SRK, Priyanka Chopra, Farhan Akhtar, Ritesh Sidhwani for 'Don 2' - Airport Express New Delhi Station
Manoj Bajpayee, Tia Bajpai and Maqbool Khan for 'Lanka' - Airport Express line
Emraan Hashmi for 'The Dirty Picture' - Rajiv Chowk metro station
Star cast of 'Players' - Airport Express Line
Shootings
'Jannat 2' - Shivaji Stadium metro station
'Kismat Love Paisa Dilli'- Shivaji Stadium metro station
Tamil Film 'Thaandavam' - Shivaji Stadium metro station

Look for Friday Mosque (Jama Masjid) on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Friday Mosque (Jama Masjid) in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Friday Mosque (Jama Masjid)" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Gurdwara Bangla Sahib
Gurdwara Bangla Sahib as viewed from Main Entrance.
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Religion
Affiliation Sikhism
Location
Location Connaught Place, Delhi, India.
Architecture
Style Sikh architecture, Mughal
Completed 1664 as a bungalow, again rebuilt in 1783, current structure mostly built post 1947
Gurdwara Bangla Sahib (listenⓘ) is one of the most prominent Sikh gurdwaras, or Sikh house of worship, in Delhi, India, and known for its association with the eighth Sikh Guru, Guru Har Krishan, as well as the holy pond inside its complex, known as the "Sarovar." It was first built as a small shrine by Sikh General Sardar Baghel Singh in 1783, on the bungalow donated by king Raja Jai Singh of Amer, who supervised the construction of nine Sikh shrines in Delhi in the same year, during the reign of Mughal Emperor, Shah Alam II.[1]
It is situated near Connaught Place, New Delhi on Baba Kharak Singh Marg and it is instantly recognisable by its golden dome and tall flagpole.
History[edit]
Night view of Gurdwara Bangla Sahib and the Sarovar.
Gurdwara Bangla Sahib was originally a bungalow belonging to Raja Jai Singh, a Rajput ruler in the seventeenth century, and was known as Jaisinghpura Palace, in Jaisingh Pura, an historic neighbourhood demolished to make way for the Connaught Place, shopping district.[2] Since Guru Har Krishan stayed at Raja Jai Singh's Banglow (pronounced "bangla" in Hindi and Punjabi) which has now been converted to a gurdwara, now the gurdwara is called the Bangla Sahib to memorialise Guru Har Krishan's stay here.[3]
The eighth Sikh Guru, Guru Har Krishan resided here during his stay in Delhi in 1664. During that time, there was a smallpox and cholera epidemic, and Guru Har Krishan helped the suffering by giving aid and fresh water from the well at this house. Soon he too contracted the illness and eventually died on 30 March 1664. A small tank was later constructed by Raja Jai Singh over the well, its water is now revered as having healing properties and is taken by Sikhs throughout the world back to their homes.[3]
The gurdwara and its Sarovar are now a place of great reverence for Sikhs, and a place for special congregation on birth anniversary of Guru Har Krishan.
In March 2021, the gurdwara inaugurated the cheapest diagnostic centre with the aim to provide healthcare for the poor. The patients can get an MRI scan at ₹50.[4]
In 1984, during the anti-Sikh riots, some 150 Sikhs took sanctuary inside the gurdwara. An angry mob carrying cans of gasoline, attempted to storm into the temple, but were driven back.[5]
Overview[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Sikh devotees at Gurdwara Bangla Sahib
The grounds include the Gurdwara, a kitchen, a large (holy) pond, a school, and an art gallery. As with all Sikh Gurdwaras, the concept of langar is practised, and all people, regardless of race or religion may eat in the Gurdwara kitchen (langar hall). The Langar (food) is prepared by gursikhs who work there and also by volunteers who like to help out. At the Gurdwara, visitors are requested to cover their hair and not to wear shoes. Assistance to foreigners and visitors with Guides, head scarves, and shoe-minding service can be found inside the compound and are available free of charge. Anyone can volunteer to help keep the shoes in the shoe-minding room, and cleaning the precincts of the Gurdwara.
The complex also houses a higher secondary school, Baba Baghel Singh Museum, a library, and a hospital. The Gurdwara and the langar hall are now air-conditioned. A new "yatri Niwas" (travellers hostel), and multi-level parking space have been constructed. Toilet facilities are available. The space around the back entrance to the Gurdwara is also being spruced up, so as to give a better view from the roadside.
Gurdwara Bangla Sahib.
Panorama of Bangla Sahib with the Sarovar

Look for Hauz Khas Village on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Hauz Khas Village in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Hauz Khas Village" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Humayun's Tomb
Panoramic view of tomb in the daylight
Location of Humayun's Tomb in Delhi
General information
Type Tomb
Architectural style Mughal
Location Mathura Road, Nizamuddin East, Nizamuddin, Delhi, India
Coordinates 28°35′35.8″N 77°15′02.5″E
Groundbreaking 1557
Design and construction
Architect(s)
Mirak Mirza Ghiyath
Sayyid Muhammad
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Official name Humayun's Tomb, Delhi
Criteria Cultural: (ii), (iv)
Reference 232bis
Inscription 1993 (17th Session)
Extensions 2016
Area 27.04 ha (0.1044 sq mi)
Buffer zone 53.21 ha (0.2054 sq mi)
Humayun's tomb (Persian: Maqbara-i Humayun) is the tomb of Mughal emperor, Mirza Nasir al-Din Muhammad commonly known as Humayun situated in Delhi, India.[1] The tomb was commissioned by Humayun's first wife and chief consort, Empress Bega Begum under her patronage[2][3][4][5][6] in 1558, and designed by Mirak Mirza Ghiyas and his son, Sayyid Muhammad,[7] Persian architects chosen by her.[8][9] It was the first garden-tomb on the Indian subcontinent,[10] and is located in Nizamuddin East, Delhi, close to the Dina-panah Citadel, also known as Purana Qila (Old Fort), that Humayun found in 1538. It was also the first structure to use red sandstone at such a scale.[11][12] The tomb was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1993,[10] and since then has undergone extensive restoration work, which is complete.[13] Besides the main tomb enclosure of Humayun, several smaller monuments dot the pathway leading up to it, from the main entrance in the West, including one that even pre-dates the main tomb itself, by twenty years; it is the tomb complex of Isa Khan Niazi, an Afghan noble in Sher Shah Suri's court of the Suri dynasty, who fought against the Mughals, constructed in 1547 CE.
The complex encompasses the main tomb of the Emperor Humayun, which houses the graves of Empress Bega Begum, Hajji Begum, and also Dara Shikoh, great-great-grandson of Humayun and son of the later Emperor Shah Jahan, as well as numerous other subsequent Mughals, including Emperor Jahandar Shah, Farrukhsiyar, Rafi Ul-Darjat, Rafi Ud-Daulat, Muhammad Kam Bakhsh and Alamgir II.[14][15] It represented a leap in Mughal architecture, and together with its accomplished Charbagh garden, typical of Persian gardens, but never seen before in India, it set a precedent for subsequent Mughal architecture. It is seen as a clear departure from the fairly modest mausoleum of his father, the first Mughal Emperor, Babur, called Bagh-e Babur (Gardens of Babur) in Kabul (Afghanistan). Though the latter was the first Emperor to start the tradition of being buried in a paradise garden.[16][17] Modelled on Gur-e Amir, the tomb of his ancestor and Asia's conqueror Timur in Samarkand, it created a precedent for future Mughal architecture of royal mausolea, which reached its zenith with the Taj Mahal, at Agra.[18][19][20]
The site was chosen on the banks of Yamuna River, due to its proximity to Nizamuddin Dargah, the mausoleum of the celebrated Sufi saint of Delhi, Nizamuddin Auliya, who was much revered by the rulers of Delhi, and whose residence, Chilla Nizamuddin Auliya lies just north-east of the tomb. In later Mughal history, the last Mughal Emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafar took refuge here, during the Indian Rebellion of 1857, along with three princes, and was captured by Captain Hodson before being exiled to Rangoon.[9][21] At the time of the Slave Dynasty this land was under the 'KiloKheri Fort' which was capital of Sultan Qaiqabad, son of Nasiruddin (1268–1287).
The Tombs of Battashewala Complex lie in the buffer zone of the World Heritage Site of the Humayun Tomb Complex; the two complexes are separated by a small road but enclosed within their own separate compound wall.[22]
History[edit]
Mughal Emperor, Humayun r. 1508–1556
Capture of the last Mughal emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar and his sons by William Hodson at Humayun's tomb in September 1857
After his death on 27 January 1556, Humayun's body was first buried in his palace in Purana Quila at Delhi. Thereafter it was taken to Sirhind, in Punjab by Khanjar Beg and, in 1558, it was seen by Humayun's son, the then Mughal Emperor, Akbar. Akbar subsequently visited the tomb in 1571, when it was about to be completed.[23][24][25]
The tomb of Humayun was built by the orders of his first wife and chief consort, Empress Bega Begum (also known as Haji Begum). Construction began in 1565 and was completed in 1572; it cost 1.5 million rupees,[9] paid entirely by the Empress.[26] Bega Begum had been so grieved over her husband's death that she had thenceforth dedicated her life to a sole purpose: the construction of a memorial to him that would be the most magnificent mausoleum in the Empire, at a site near the Yamuna River in Delhi.[27] According to Ain-i-Akbari, a 16th-century detailed document written during the reign of Akbar, Bega Begum supervised the construction of the tomb after returning from Mecca and undertaking the Hajj pilgrimage.[28]
According to Abd al-Qadir Bada'uni, one of the few contemporary historians to mention construction of the tomb, it was designed by the Persian architect Mirak Mirza Ghiyas (also referred to as Mirak Ghiyathuddin), who was selected by the Empress and brought from Herat (northwest Afghanistan); he had previously designed several buildings in Herat, Bukhara (now Uzbekistan), and others elsewhere in India.[8] Ghiyas died before the structure was completed and it was completed by his son, Sayyed Muhammad ibn Mirak Ghiyathuddin.[23][24]
An English merchant, William Finch, who visited the tomb in 1611, describes rich interior furnishing of the central chamber (in comparison to the sparse look today). He mentions the presence of rich carpets, as well as a shamiana, a small tent above the cenotaph, which was covered with a pure white sheet, and with copies of the Quran in front along with Humayun's sword, turban and shoes.[25]
The fortunes of the once famous Charbagh (Four-gardens) made of four squares separated by four promenades, radiating from a central reflection pool. It spread over 13 hectares surrounding the monument, changed repeatedly over the years after its construction. The capital had already shifted to Agra in 1556, and the decline of the Mughals accelerated the decay of the monument and its features, as the expensive upkeep of the garden proved impossible. By the early 18th century, the once lush gardens were replaced by vegetable garden of people who had settled within the walled area. However, the capture of the last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafar during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 together with the premises, and his subsequent sentencing to exile, along with execution of his three sons, meant that the monument's worst days lay ahead, as the British took over Delhi completely. In 1860, the Mughal design of the garden was replanted to a more English garden-style, with circular beds replacing the fours central water pools on the axial pathways and trees profusely planted in flowerbeds. This fault was corrected in the early 20th century, when on Viceroy Lord Curzon's orders the original gardens were restored in a major restoration project between 1903 and 1909, which also included lining the plaster channels with sandstone; a 1915 planting scheme added emphasis to the central and diagonal axis by lining it with trees, though some trees were also planted on the platform originally reserved for tents.[16]
In 1882, the official curator of ancient monuments in India published his first report, which mentioned that the main garden was let out to various cultivators; amongst them till late were the royal descendants, who grew cabbage and tobacco in it.[29]
In Ronaldshay's biography of Lord Curzon a letter is quoted from Lord Curzon to his wife in April 1905: "You remember Humayun's tomb? I had the garden restored, the water channels dug out and refilled and the whole place restored to its pristine beauty. I went to England last summer and, the eye of the master being away, the whole place has been allowed to revert. The garden has been let to a native and is now planted with turnips and the work of four years is thrown away! I shall drive out there, and woe betide the deputy commissioner whose apathy has been responsible."
During the Partition of India, in August 1947 the Purana Qila together with Humayun's Tomb, became major refugee camps for Muslims migrating to the newly founded Pakistan, and was later managed by the government of India. These camps stayed open for about five years, and caused considerable damage not only to the extensive gardens, but also to the water channels and the principal structures. The camps were raided many times by jathas which caused vandalism to occur during the early partition days in 1947. Eventually, to avoid vandalism, the cenotaphs within the mausoleum were encased in brick. In the coming years, the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) took on responsibility for the preservation of heritage monuments in India, and gradually the building and its gardens were restored. Until 1985, four unsuccessful attempts were made to reinstate the original water features.[16][30]
An important phase in the restoration of the complex began around 1993, when the monument was declared a World Heritage Site. This brought new interest to its restoration, and a detailed research and excavation process began under the aegis of the Aga Khan Trust and the ASI. This culminated in 2003, when much of the complex and gardens were restored, with the historic fountains running once again after several centuries of disuse. The restoration has been a continuous process ever since, with subsequent phases addressing various aspects and monuments of the complex.[16]
Architecture[edit]
Floor plan of tomb structure of Humayun's Tomb
Humayun's cenotaph
Ceiling of entrance chamber inside
Turkic and Mughal rule in the Indian subcontinent also introduced Central Asian and Persian styles of Islamic architecture in the region, and by the late 12th century early monuments in this style were appearing in and around Delhi, the capital of Delhi Sultanate. Starting with the Turkic Slave dynasty which built the Qutb Minar (1192) and its adjacent Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque (1193 CE). North India was successively ruled by foreign dynasties in the coming centuries, giving rise to the Indo-Islamic architecture. While the prevailing style of architecture was trabeate, employing pillars, beams and lintels, this brought in the arcuate style of construction, with its arches and beams, which flourished under Mughal patronage and by incorporating elements of Indian architecture, especially Rajasthani architecture including decorative corbel brackets, balconies, pendentive decorations and indeed kiosks or chhatris, to develop a distinct Mughal architecture style, which was to become a lasting legacy of the Mughal rule.[31] The combination of red sandstone and white marble was previously seen in Delhi Sultanate period tombs and mosques, most distinctively in the highly decorative Alai Darwaza gatehouse in the Qutub complex, Mehrauli, built in 1311, under the Khalji dynasty.[32]
Humayun's Tomb Garden Enclosure Plan
The high rubble built enclosure is entered through two lofty double-storeyed gateways on the west and south, 16 metres high with rooms on either side of the passage and small courtyards on the upper floors. The tomb, built of rubble masonry and red sandstone, uses white marble as a cladding material and also for the flooring, lattice screens (jaalis), door frames, eaves (chhajja), and the main dome. It stands on a vaulted terrace eight metres high and spread over 12,000m2. It is essentially square in design, though chamfered on the edges to appear octagonal, to prepare ground for the design of the interior structure. The plinth made with rubble core has fifty-six cells all around and houses over 100 gravestones. The entire base structure is on a raised platform, a few steps high.[23]
Inspired by Persian architecture; the tomb reaches a height of 47 metres (154 ft) and the plinth is 91 metres (299 ft) wide, and was the first Indian building to use the Persian double dome on a high neck drum, and measures 42.5 metres (139 ft), and is topped by 6 metres (20 ft) high brass finial ending in a crescent, common in Timurid tombs. The double or 'double-layered' dome, has an outer layer that supports the white marble exterior, while the inner part gives shape to the cavernous interior volume. In a contrast to the pure white exterior dome, the rest of the building is made up of red sandstone, with white and black marble and yellow sandstone detailing, to relieve the monotony.[33]
The symmetrical and simple design on the exterior is in sharp contrast with the complex interior floor plan, of the inner chambers, which is a square ninefold plan, where eight two-storied vaulted chambers radiate from the central, double-height domed chamber. It can be entered through an imposing entrance iwan (high arc) on the south, which is slightly recessed, while other sides are covered with intricate jaalis, stone latticework. Underneath this white dome in a domed chamber (hujra), lies the central octagonal sepulcher, the burial chamber containing a single cenotaph, that of the second Mughal Emperor, Humayun. The cenotaph is aligned on the north-south axis, as per Islamic tradition, wherein the head is placed to the north, while the face is turned sideways towards Mecca. The real burial chamber of the Emperor, however, lies in an underground chamber, exactly beneath the upper cenotaph, accessible through a separate passage outside the main structure, which remains mostly closed to visiting public. This burial technique along with pietra dura, a marble and even stone inlay ornamentation in numerous geometrical and arabesque patterns, seen all around the facade is an important legacy of Indo-Islamic architecture, and flourished in many later mausolea of the Mughal Empire, like the Taj Mahal, which also features twin cenotaphs and exquisite pietra dura craftsmanship.[31]
The main chamber also carries the symbolic element, a mihrab design over the central marble lattice or jaali, facing Mecca in the West. Instead of the traditional Surah 24, An-Noor of Quran being inscribed on the mihrabs, this one is just an outline allowing light to enter directly into the chamber, from Qibla or the direction of Mecca, thus elevating the status of the Emperor above his rivals and closer to divinity.[23]
This chamber with its high ceiling is encompassed by four main octagonal chambers on two floors, set at the diagonals with arched lobbies leading to them also connecting them. There are four auxiliary chambers in between, suggesting that the tomb was built as a dynastic mausoleum. Collectively the concept of eight side chambers not only offers passage for circumambulation of the main cenotaph, a practice common in Sufism and also visible in many Mughal imperial mausoleums, it also reflects the concept of Paradise in Islamic cosmology. Each of the main chambers has, in turn, eight more, smaller chambers radiating from them, and thus the symmetrical ground plan reveals itself to contain 124 vaulted chambers in all. Many smaller chambers too, contain cenotaphs of other members of the Mughal royal family and nobility, all within main walls of the tomb. Prominent among them cenotaphs of Hamida Begum herself are there alongside Dara Shikoh. In all there are over 100 graves within the entire complex, including many on the first level terrace, earning it the name "Dormitory of the Mughals". Since the graves are not inscribed their identification remains uncertain.[14][24]
The building was the first to use its unique combination of red sandstone and white marble, and includes several elements of Indian architecture, like the small canopies or chhatris surrounding the central dome, popular in Rajasthani architecture and which were originally covered with blue tiles.[14][24][34]
Char Bagh[edit]
While the main tomb took over eight years to build, it was also placed in centre of a 30-acre (120,000 m2) Charbagh, a Persian-style garden with a quadrilateral layout. It was the first of its kind in South Asia on such a scale.[23] The highly geometrical and enclosed Paradise garden is divided into four squares by paved walkways (khiyabans) and two bisecting central water channels, reflecting the four rivers that flow in jannat, the Islamic concept of paradise. Each of the four square is further divided into 8 smaller gardens with pathways, creating 32 miniature gardens in all (with the mausoleum in the centre), a design typical of later Mughal gardens. The central water channels appear to be disappearing beneath the tomb structure and reappearing on the other side in a straight line, suggesting a Quranic verse which talks of rivers flowing beneath the 'Garden of Paradise'.[35][24]
Standing in the center at the place where the main axes intersect, the tomb is similar in form and position to a garden pavilion. But here it marks the place where the body of the deceased ruler rests. "The garden is about sovereignty, and the mausoleum is about dynasty. When the mausoleum is implanted in a garden, as it is at Humayun's tomb, sovereignty and dynasty are combined in a teleological statement that the king is king as he always has been and always will be."[23]
The entire tomb and the garden is enclosed within high rubble walls on three sides. The fourth side was meant to be the river Yamuna, which has since shifted course away from the structure. The central walkways terminate at two gates: a main one in the southern wall, and a smaller one in the western wall. It has two double-storey entrances; the West gate is used now, while the South gate, which was used during Mughal era, is now closed. Aligned at the centre on the eastern wall lies a baradari, which is a building or room with twelve doors designed to allow the free draught of air through it. On the northern wall lies a hammam, a bath chamber.[36]
Tomb of Barber (Nai Ka Gumbad)
Chillah Nizamuddin
Other monuments[edit]
Isa Khan Niyazi's Tomb, dating 1547
Tomb and mosque of Isa Khan: Several monuments dot the pathway leading up to the tomb enclosure from the main entrance in the West. Prominent among them is one that pre-dates the main tomb itself, by twenty years. Constructed in 1547 CE, it is the tomb complex of Isa Khan Niyazi, an Afghan noble in Sher Shah Suri's court of the Suri dynasty, who fought against the Mughals. The octagonal tomb is positioned within an octagonal garden, which was built during his own lifetime and the reign of Islam Shah Suri, son of Sher Shah. It later served as a burial place for the entire family of Isa Khan. On the western side of the tomb lies a three-bay wide mosque, in red sandstone. The octagonal tomb bears a striking resemblance to other tombs of the Sur dynasty monuments in the Lodhi Gardens, in Delhi and demonstrates a marked progression in the development of the exquisite architectural style of the main tomb. Some of the architectural details present here were seen later in the main Humayun's tomb, though on a much grander scale, such as the tomb being placed in a walled garden enclosure.[32][37]
Bu Halima's Garden and tomb view
Bu Halima's Tomb and Garden: When entering the complex from the West, visitor's first enter a garden complex, known as Bu Halima's Garden, though little is known about her, and since the tomb or the raised platform where it once stood is not at the centre, it appears to be a later addition.[32][38]
Afsarwala Tomb and mosque: Standing southwest end of the complex, lies the Afsarwala tomb, dedicated to an unknown person. One of the marble graves inside the tomb is dated 1566-67 CE. The mosque itself can be dated to the same period judging from its siting, standing as it does adjacent to the tomb, rather than away from it.[32]
Arab Serai: Literally meaning the sarai (resthouse) for the horses, the structure stands adjacent to the Afsarwala mosque and was built by Bega Begum[39] around 1560-1561 CE, ostensibly built for the craftsmen who came for the construction work. It could accommodate 300 Arabas. (in Persian ارابه means:Cart or Gari (vehicle)).
Nila Gumbad ca 1625–6, built by courtier Abdul Rahim Khan-I-Khana, for his servant Fahim Khan
Nila Gumbad: Standing outside the boundary of the complex is the tomb known as Nila Burj (now known as Nila Gumbad) or 'Blue Dome', so called because it carries striking blue glazed tiles. It was built by Abdul Rahim Khan-I-Khana, son of Bairam Khan also a courtier in Mughal Emperor, Akbar's court, for his servant Miyan Fahim. Fahim, who not only grew up with his son, but later also died alongside one of Rahim's own sons, Feroze Khan, while fighting against the rebellion of Mughal general Mahabat Khan in 1625–26, during the reign of Jahangir.[40] This structure is known for its unique architecture, as it is octagonal on the outside while square within; its ceiling is decorated with painted and incised plaster, it has a high neck dome and shows a conspicuous absence of a double dome feature, common to tombs of the period.
Chillah Nizamuddin Aulia: Believed to be the residence of patron saint of Delhi, Nizamuddin Auliya (d. 1325), is located just outside the main complex, near the northeastern corner of the principal mausoleum and is an example of Tughlaq period architecture.
Yet further away from the tomb complex, lie Mughal-period monuments, Bada Bateshewala Mahal, the tomb of Muzaffar Husain Mirza, the grand nephew of Humayun, built 1603–04 on platform with five arches on each side, has its interior walls decorated with incised and painted plaster; the Chote Bateshewala Mahal once an arcaded octagonal building with a domed ceiling and stone jaalis. Both these monument now lie inside a commercial area facing the complex's parking lot.[41] Another period structure is Barapula, a bridge with 12 piers and 11 arched openings, built in 1621 by Mihr Banu Agha, the chief eunuch of Jahangir's court.[42]
Barber's Tomb: Towards the south-east corner, within the Char Bagh, lies a tomb known as Nai-ka-Gumbad, or Barber's Tomb, belonging to royal barber, it is datable to 1590-91 CE, through an inscription found inside. Its proximity to the main tomb and the fact that it is the only other structure within the main tomb complex suggests its importance, however, there are no inscriptions suggesting as to who is interred therein, the name Barbers tomb is the local name of the structure, hence still in use.[32]
The tomb stands on a raised platform, reached by seven steps from the south, it has a square plan and consists of a single compartment covered with a double-dome. Inside lie two graves each inscribed with verses from the Quran. Also, one of the graves is inscribed with figure 999 which may stand for the Hijra year 1590–91. However, in an 1820 watercolour now at British Library, the Persian caption beneath the structure reads, Maqbarah-i-Kokah i.e. "Tomb of Kaka", and Kokah or Kaka in Persian stand for foster-brother (mirak brother), Mirak (a Persian title as sir) though the identity of the person remains unknown, and it might be (incorrectly) referring to another nearby monument in the Chausath Khamba complex, the tomb of Ataga Khan, the foster brother of Humayun, which lies in Nizamuddin West area and not to the east of the Humayun's tomb.[43][44][45]
Tombs in Monument[edit]
Nasiruddin Muhammad Humayun
Hamida Banu Begum
Bega Begum
Shahzada Murad Mirza
Shahzada Dara Shikoh
Shahzada Kam Baksh
Shahzada Bidar Bakht
Muizuddin Muhammad Jahandar Shah
Muinuddin Muhammad Farrukhsiyar
Shahzada Azim-ush-Shaan Mirza
Shahzada Rafi-ush-Shaan Mirza
Shahzada Jahan Shah Mirza
Shahzada Humayun Mirza
Rafi ud-Darajat
Rafi ud-Daulah
Azizuddin Muhammad Alamgir II
Restoration[edit]
Restoration work at Humayun's tomb, required removal of 3000 truckloads (12,000 cubic meters) of earth, and special chute installed at the back, from the roof (2008)
Before the restoration work was undertaken, vandalism and illegal encroachments were rampant at the site of the tomb, presenting a serious danger to the preservation of the tomb. At the main entrance of Humayun's Tomb, dingy stalls had been put up under a very corrupt system of municipal patronage known as tehbazari, and all sorts of heavy vehicles were allowed to be parked illegally in these open spaces. On the Nila Gumbad side was a huge citadel of India's vote bank politics – thousands of "slum dwellers" were kept by an influential section of the political leadership to serve as "bonded voters" during elections. The environment of the dargah of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya had also been ruthlessly degraded and the holy tank had become a messy cesspool.
Restoration work by the Aga Khan Trust for Culture (AKTC), in collaboration with Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), began around 1999 after research work, which started in 1997, and was completed in March 2003. Around 12 hectares of lawns were replanted, and over 2500 trees and plants, including mango, lemon, neem, hibiscus and jasmine cuttings, were planted in the gardens. Installation of a new water circulation system for the walkway channels was also undertaken. To ensure that water flowed naturally through the channels and pools on the 12-hectare (30 acre) site without the aid of hydraulic systems, the water channels were re-laid to an exacting grade of one centimetre every 40 metres (1:4000 slope). This eventually enabled water to flow through the watercourses in the gardens, and dormant fountains to start functioning once again. Other tasks in this mammoth restoration project included setting up a rainwater harvesting system using 128 ground water recharge pits, and desilting and revitalising old wells that were discovered during the restoration work.[46][47] This was first a privately funded collaborative effort under the aegis of the National Cultural Fund (NCF) by the ASI. Funding included a sum of $650,000 from the Aga Khan Trust for Culture of His Highness the Aga Khan, with help from the Oberoi Hotels Group.[48][49][50][51] In addition, AKTC is conducting a more significant restoration at Babur's tomb, the resting place of Humayun's father in Kabul.
After the restoration work, the conditions in and around this complex underwent a sea-change. All the stalls and other intrusions were removed and the monuments and green spaces restored. Elegant gardens now surround the monuments, adding to their dignity and grace. When illuminated at night, the monument looks truly magnificent.
In 2009, as a part of the ongoing restoration work, the ASI and AKTC, after months of manual work using hand-tools, removed from the roof a thick layer of cement concrete that had been exerting pressure of about 1,102 tons on the structure. The cement concrete was originally laid in the 1920s to prevent water seepage, and led to a blockage in water passages. Subsequently, each time there was leakage, a fresh layer of cement was added, leading to an accumulated thickness of about 40 cm; this has now been replaced with a traditional lime-based roof layer. In the next phase, similar treatment was given to the tomb's first chabutra (plinth), which was originally paved with large blocks of quartzite stone, some weighing over a 1,000 kg. In the 1940s, an uneven settlement in the lower plinth had been corrected by covering it with a layer of concrete, adding to the disfigurement of the original Mughal flooring, which matched with that at the West Gate.[52]
The Tomb in literature[edit]
Letitia Elizabeth Landon published the poetical illustration The Tomb of Humaioon, Delhi in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1833. This reflects on the scene and is based on an engraving of a painting by William Purser, showing a somewhat distant view of the tomb.[53]
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
'The Tomb of Humaioon, Delhi', a poetical
illustration by L. E. L.
The mausoleum today[edit]
Ill thought out construction plans like The Delhi Government's plans in 2006–2007 to build a new tunnel to connect East Delhi to Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Delhi in South Delhi, and to widen the roads near the tomb for the 2010 Commonwealth Games to connect National Highway-24 with Lodhi Road, also posed a serious threat to the monument. Urban planners feared that the historic monument would not have been able to withstand the vibrations ensuing from the construction work in such close proximity. Finally, the Archaeological Survey of India was able to halt the plans.[54][55]
On 30 May 2014, the finial of the tomb was knocked off the dome by a heavy storm which struck the city.[56] On 19 April 2016, India's Union Culture Minister Dr. Mahesh Sharma unveiled the restored finial of the monument.[57] The original finial will be conserved.[58]
Gallery[edit]
View of the Southwestern Corner of Humayun's Tomb
A reflection
Six-pointed Stars on One of Humayun's Tomb's Pishtaqs
Cenotaphs of Hamida Banu Begum, Dara Shikoh etc. in a side room
A jali mihrab indicates the qibla direction while one stands inside Humayun's cenotaph's chamber and looks to the west.
Humayun's Tomb Seen from Inside the West Gate
The Western Facade of the West Gate at Humayun's Tomb
Isa Khan's mosque, across his tomb, also built ca 1547 CE, near Humayun's tomb
Gateway into Araba Sarai, south to the pathway towards Humayun's tomb
Afsarwala tomb located near Humayun Tomb
Tomb of Humayun, with his barber's tomb (Nai-ka-Gumbad) in the foreground, Delhi (1858 photograph)
English garden-style roundabouts replaced the square central tanks of the Charbagh garden in 1860
Humayun's Tomb at night
A side view of Humayun's Tomb

ISKCON New Delhi
Sri Sri Radha Parthasarathi Mandir
Outer View of Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District New Delhi
Deity Radha Parthasarathi (Krishna and Radha)
Location
Location Hare Krishna Hills, East of Kailash
State Delhi
Country India
Location in Delhi
Geographic coordinates 28°33′29″N 77°14′36″E
Architecture
Type Hindu temple architecture
Completed 1998
Website
iskcondelhi
Sri Sri Radha Parthasarathi Mandir, generally known as the ISKCON Delhi temple, is a well known Vaishnav temple of Lord Krishna and goddess Radha in the form of Radha Parthasarathi. The Temple was inaugurated on 5 April, 1998 by the then Prime Minister of India Atal Bihari Vajpayee[1] in the presence of former Chief Minister of Delhi Sahib Singh Verma and Sushma Swaraj. It is located at Hare Krishna Hills (near Nehru Place), in the East of Kailash area of New Delhi, India.
Temple Complex[edit]
Temple during Janamashtami
ISKCON Temple, designed and built by Achyut Kanvinde who in 1993 agreed to accept a pro-bono commission to build this temple complex for the followers of Srila Prabhupada,[2] is one of the largest temple complexes in India. It comprises numerous rooms for priests and for service renders. The temple also has a 375-seater auditorium which is used for cultural and religious functions. It has many halls that are used for its administration purposes and various seminars. It is divided into four broad sections.[citation needed]
Glory of India Vedic Cultural Centre[edit]
The temple complex houses the Glory of India Vedic Cultural Centre, a popular destination for visitors and tourists to learn about major Hindu texts which are presented using various multimedia technologies, these include:
Bhagavad Gita Animatronics - Using a blend of dramatic narration, lasers and projects, this show allows the visitors to learn the five major concepts of Bhagavad Gita, the three modes of nature and the Yoga systems presented therein.
Mahabharat Experience - A light and sound show which presents the story line of Mahabharat which span over thousands of verses in a concise manner.
Ramayana Art Gallery - A collection of over 30 original oil paintings painted by ISKCON's members from USA, Russia, India, UK.
Bhagavat Puran Exhibit - This exhibit presents one of the most important text in the Vaishnava tradition in a visual format.
World's Largest Sacred Book[edit]
The Glory of India Vedic Cultural Centre holds the 'Astounding Bhagavad Gita', which is the largest printed book of the major text of any world religion. The Italian printed 'Astounding Bhagavad Gita', weighs 800 kg and measures over 2.8 metres, was unveiled by the Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi on 26 February, 2019[3] in the presence of Tridandi Sannyasi Gopal Krishna Goswami and India's Culture Minister Dr Mahesh Sharma.[4]
Gallery[edit]
Radha Parthasarathi, the premier deity of temple
Gaura Nitai shrine at ISKCON temple, Delhi.
Panoramic view of ISKCON Temple
Temple on Janmashtami Night

Not to be confused with Gateway of India.
India Gate
India
For the dead of the Indian Armies who fell during World War I and the Third Anglo-Afghan War
Established 10 February 1921
Unveiled 12 February 1931
Location 28°36′46.31″N 77°13′45.5″E
India Gate (Delhi)
Designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens
13,313 engraved names, 12,357 Indian[1] and honours 70,000 fallen soldiers of undivided India[2]
The India Gate (formerly known as All India War Memorial) is a war memorial located near the Kartavya path on the eastern edge of the "ceremonial axis" of New Delhi, formerly called Rajpath in Chennai. It stands as a memorial to 74,187 soldiers of the Indian Army who died between 1914 and 1921 in the First World War, in France, Flanders, Mesopotamia, Persia, East Africa, Gallipoli and elsewhere in the Near and the Far East, and the Third Anglo-Afghan War. 13,300 servicemen's names, including some soldiers and officers from the United Kingdom, are inscribed on the gate.[2] Designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens, the gate evokes the architectural style of the ancient Roman triumphal arches such as the Arch of Constantine in Rome, and later memorial arches; it is often compared to the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, and the Gateway of India in Mumbai.
Following the Bangladesh Liberation war in 1972, a structure consisting of a black marble plinth with a reversed rifle, capped by a war helmet and bounded by four eternal flames, was built beneath the archway. This structure, called Amar Jawan Jyoti (Flame of the Immortal Soldier), has since 1971 served as India's tomb of the unknown soldier. India Gate is counted amongst the largest war memorials in India and every Republic Day, the Prime Minister visits the gate to pay their tributes to the Amar Jawan Jyoti, following which the Republic Day parade starts. India Gate is often a location for civil society protests, and is popular with tourists.
History[edit]
Armoured cars passing through the gate, in the 1930s
The India Gate was part of the work of the Imperial War Graves Commission (IWGC), which came into existence in December 1917 under the British rule for building war graves and memorials to soldiers who were killed in the First World War.[3] The foundation stone of the gate then called the All India War Memorial, was laid on 10 February 1921, at 16:30, by the visiting Duke of Connaught in a ceremony attended by officers and men of the Imperial Indian Army, Imperial Service Troops, the commander in chief, and Chelmsford, the viceroy.[4] On the occasion, the viceroy is reported to have said, "The stirring tales of individual heroism, will live forever in the annals of this country", and that the memorial which was a tribute to the memory of heroes, "known and unknown", would inspire future generations to endure hardships with similar fortitude and "no less valor".[4] The Duke also read out a message by the King, which said, "On this spot, in the central vista of the Capital of India, there will stand a Memorial Archway, designed to keep", in the thoughts of future generations, "the glorious sacrifice of the officers and men of the Indian Army who fought and fell". During the ceremony, the Deccan Horse, 3rd Sappers and Miners, 6th Jat Light Infantry, 34th Sikh Pioneers, 39th Garhwal Rifles, 59th Scinde Rifles (Frontier Force), 117th Mahrattas, and 5th Gurkha Rifles. The land was owned by contractor Sir Sobha Singh who helped construct large tracts of New Delhi and was the primary contractor.[5][6]
India gate, as seen from Kartavya Path
Ten years after the foundation stone's laying on 12 February 1931, the memorial was inaugurated by Lord Irwin, who, on the occasion, said "those who after us shall look upon this monument may learn in pondering its purpose something of that sacrifice and service which the names upon its walls record."[7] In the decade between the laying of foundation stone of the memorial and its inauguration, the rail-line was shifted to run along the Yamuna River, and the New Delhi Railway Station was opened in 1926.[8]
The gate, which is illuminated every evening from 19:00 to 21:30, today serves as one of Delhi's most important tourist attractions. Cars used to travel through the gate until it was closed to traffic.[citation needed] The Republic Day Parade starts from Rashtrapati Bhavan and passes around the India Gate.[citation needed] India gate is often a location for civil society protests, including demonstrations in response to the 2011 anti-corruption movement.[9][10][11]
In 2017, the India Gate was twinned with the Arch of Remembrance in Leicester, England, another Lutyens war memorial, following a very similar design but on a smaller scale. In a ceremony, India's high commissioner to the United Kingdom laid a wreath at the arch in Leicester and the British high commissioner to India laid one at the India Gate.[12]
Design and structure[edit]
Angled view
The memorial gate was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens, who was not only the main architect of New Delhi but also a member of the Imperial War Graves Commission and one of Europe's foremost designers of war graves and memorials. He designed sixty-six war memorials in Europe, including the highly regarded Cenotaph in London in 1919, the first national war memorial erected after World War I, for which he was commissioned by David Lloyd George, the British prime minister.[13] The memorial in New Delhi, like the Cenotaph in London, is a secular memorial, free of religious and "culturally-specific iconography such as crosses". Lutyens according to his biographer, Christopher Hussey, relied on the "elemental mode", a style of commemoration based on a "universal architectural style free of religious ornamentation".
Looking up, through the main arch
The India Gate, which has been called a "creative reworking of the Arc de Triomphe" has a span of 30 feet (9.1 m) across the larger opening and lies on the eastern axial end of Kingsway, present-day Kartavya Path, the central vista and main ceremonial procession route in New Delhi.[13] The 42-metre-tall (138 ft) India Gate stands on a low base of red Bharatpur stone and rises in stages to a huge cornice moulding above a frieze with sunburst motifs. The shallow domed bowl at the top was intended to be filled with burning oil on anniversaries, but this is rarely done.[citation needed] The memorial-gate hexagon complex, with a diameter of about 625 metres (2,051 ft), covers approximately 306,000 m2 (3,290,000 sq ft) in area.[citation needed]
The India Gate structure is oblong, with a large archway on each of the four faces, but the arches on the long sides are larger and higher. The arches on the shorter sides are blocked at the bottom, with doorways, but open higher up. Technically the four arches make the building a tetrapylon. There is a large ornament in stone above the blocked bottom of the arches on the shorter sides. Mouldings run around the building at the levels from which both sizes of arch rise, and the keystones of the arches protrude slightly. The top of the keystones on the short sides' arches touch the bottom of the moulding at the base level of the higher long sides' arches. The ceilings and undersides of the arches are decorated with well-spaced coffers.
Inscriptions[edit]
The cornice of the India Gate is inscribed with Imperial suns while both sides of the arch have INDIA, flanked by the dates MCMXIV ('1914'; on the left) and MCMXIX ('1919'; on the right). Below the word INDIA, in capital letters, is inscribed:
Inscription at top of the gate
To the dead of the Indian Armies who fell and are honoured in France and Flanders, Mesopotamia and Persia, East Africa, Gallipoli and elsewhere in the Near and Far East and in Sacred Memory also of those whose names are here recorded and who fell in India on the North West Frontier and during the Third Afghan War.
13,313 names are engraved out of which 12,357 are Indian.[1][2] Access to read the names on the memorial is restricted, though they can be seen on the Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) website, which lists the names with their respective date of death, unit name, regiment, place on gate where name is inscribed, location, and other information).[14]
Canopy[edit]
Canopy in the vicinity of the gate
About 150 metres (490 ft) east of the gate, at a junction of six roads, is a 73 feet (22 m) cupola, inspired by a sixth-century pavilion from Mahabalipuram. Lutyens used four Delhi Order columns to support the domed canopy and its chhajja.[15][16]
Statue of King-Emperor George V[edit]
Canopy in 1952 with the George V statue still in place
In the autumn of 1930, Jagatjit Singh, the Maharaja of Kapurthala State, organized an appeal amongst the Indian princely rulers to erect a statue of King-Emperor George V in New Delhi to commemorate the sovereign's recent recovery from sepsis.[17] As originally conceived, the statue would have depicted the monarch in marble riding in a howdah atop a red stone elephant; a canopy was not then included in the design.[18] The final concept, approved by George V before his death, dispensed with the elephant, instead incorporating a red stone canopy and pedestal, with the pedestal standing 34.5 feet (10.52 m) tall.[19] An 18.75 feet (5.72 m) tall marble statue of the King-Emperor wearing his Delhi Durbar coronation robes and Imperial State Crown, bearing the British globus cruciger and sceptre, was placed atop the pedestal, which bore the Royal Coat of Arms and the inscription GEORGE V R I, the "R I" designating him as 'Rex Imperator' or 'King Emperor'.[19][20]
The combined height of the statue and pedestal was 53.25 feet (16.23 m); while the pedestal and canopy were designed by Lutyens, the statue was designed by Charles Sargeant Jagger of the Royal Academy of Arts. The canopy was topped by a gilded Tudor Crown and bore the Royal Cyphers of George V,[21] with the completed monument intended to "mark the loyalty and attachment of the Ruling Princes and Chiefs of India to the Person and Throne of the King-Emperor."[19] Following the premature death of Jagger, the statue's head and crown were completed by one of his assistants in England and then shipped to India, while the remainder of the monument was carved in India.[22]
The statue's installation in the autumn of 1936,[22] amidst the Indian independence movement, made it a target for Independence activists; on the night of 3 January 1943, during the Quit India movement, Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna and Manubhai Shah scaled the statue, smashed its nose and draped it with a large black cloth inscribed "Death to the Tyrant."[23] The statue remained standing at its original site for two decades following the nation's independence in 1947, but certain political factions increasingly objected to its continued presence in its central location, particularly after the tenth anniversary of Independence and the centennial of the Indian Rebellion of 1857.[20] On the night of 12–13 August 1958, the royal insignia of George V and the Tudor Crown atop the canopy were removed.[21]
With increasing pressure from Socialist members of Parliament, then-Deputy Minister Home Affairs Lalit Narayan Mishra stated in May 1964 that all British statuary would be removed from the national capital by 1966.[20] Two days before Independence Day in 1965, members of the Samyukta Socialist Party overpowered two constables guarding the site, covered the statue in tar and defaced its imperial crown, nose and one ear, also leaving a photo of Subhas Chandra Bose at the monument.[20] Despite the resulting adverse publicity and the growing controversy over the situation, the matter of relocating the statue dragged on for several years.[20] The British government rejected a proposal to repatriate the monument to the United Kingdom, citing the lack of an appropriate site and sufficient funds, while the British High Commission in New Delhi declined to have the statue relocated to their compound, due to limited space.[20] Efforts to move the statue to a Delhi park were strongly opposed by the nationalist Bharatiya Jana Sangh, which then held power in the city.[20] Finally, in late 1968, the statue was removed from its position beneath the canopy and briefly placed in storage before being moved to Delhi's Coronation Park, where it joined other British Raj-era statues.[20]
During and after the statue's removal, it was often suggested that a statue of Mahatma Gandhi be placed under the canopy.[20] The suggestion was even discussed in the Indian Parliament.[citation needed] In 1981, the government had in response to a question in the Parliament, confirmed that it was considering the installation of a Gandhi statue under the empty canopy, but nothing came of it.[24]
Subhas Chandra Bose statue[edit]
Main article: Statue of Subhas Chandra Bose
Prime Minister Narendra Modi unveils the statue of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose at India Gate, during the inauguration of the 'Kartavya Path', in New Delhi on 8 September 2022.
On 21 January 2022, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced that a statue of Subhas Chandra Bose would be installed in the canopy at India Gate. The announcement came two days before the 125th anniversary of his birth. A 28 feet high and 6 feet wide 3D holographic statue of Bose was inaugurated at the site on 23 January 2022, celebrated as Parakram Diwas (Courage Day).[25][26] On this occasion, an award in the name of Bose was instituted for the exemplary work in disaster management. On 8 September 2022, Prime Minister Narendra Modi inaugurated the newly made statue of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose near the India Gate.
Amar Jawan Jyoti[edit]
Main article: Amar Jawan Jyoti
Amar Jawan Jyoti, beneath the arch of the gate
Amar Jawan Jyoti, or the flame of the immortal soldier, is a structure consisting of black marble plinth, with reversed rifle, capped by war helmet, bound by four urns, each with the permanent light (jyoti) from compressed natural gas flames,[27] erected under the India gate to commemorate Indian soldiers martyred in the war of the liberation of Bangladesh in December 1971. It was inaugurated by the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi on 26 January 1972, the twenty-third Indian Republic Day.[citation needed]
Since the installation of the Amar Jawan Jyoti, it has served as India's tomb of the unknown soldier.[citation needed] It is staffed around the clock by the Indian armed forces.[citation needed] Wreaths are placed at the Amar Jawan Jyoti every Republic Day, Vijay Diwas, and Infantry Day[a] by the Prime Minister and the Chiefs of the Armed Forces.[28]
On 21 January 2022 the Amar Jawan Jyoti at India Gate was merged with the Amar Jawan Jyoti at the National War Memorial.[29]
National War Memorial[edit]
Main article: National War Memorial (India)
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
150m
160yds
Children's park
C - Hexagon
India Gate
Netaji
hologram
statue
Param Yodha Sthal
(Ultimate Warrior Site)
Amar Jawan Jyoti
National War Memorial
National War Memorial (NWM) complex and India Gate within the C-Hexagon, with Amar Jawan Jyoti and Netaji hologram statue. The rings of the NWM form a chakravyūha.
In July 2014, the government announced plans to construct a National War Memorial in the C-Hexagon (India Gate Circle), and an adjoining National War Museum. The cabinet allocated ₹500 crore (US$63 million) for the project.[30] The National War Memorial was completed in January, 2019.[31][32] Since January 2022, it houses the Amar Jawan Jyoti, or the "Flame of the Immortal Soldier".[29]
Gallery[edit]
The gate is illuminated with colors of the Indian flag
Engravings on the walls of the gate
The ornaments on the side axis
Flags of the Indian Armed Forces at the gate
Indian army at the gate
Russian Defence Minister Sergey Shoygu at the wreath laying ceremony
People at the gate, on International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, in 2011
India Gate View Point

Did you mean: Lodhi Gardens?
Look for Lodhi Garden on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Lodhi Garden in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Lodhi Garden" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Lotus Temple (Baháʼí House of Worship)
Full view of the Lotus Temple
Location within New Delhi
General information
Type House of Worship
Architectural style Expressionist
Location Delhi, India
Coordinates 28.553328°N 77.258456°E
Completed 13 November 1986; 37 years ago
Opened 24 December 1986; 37 years ago
Height 34.27 metres (112.4 ft)
Dimensions
Diameter 70 metres (230 ft)
Technical details
Structural system Concrete frame and precast concrete ribbed roof
Design and construction
Architect(s) Fariborz Sahba
Structural engineer Flint & Neill COWI
Other information
Seating capacity 2,500
The Lotus Temple, located in New Delhi, India, is a Baháʼí House of Worship that was dedicated in December 1986. Notable for its lotus-like shape, it has become a prominent attraction in the city. Like all Bahá’í Houses of Worship, the Lotus Temple is open to all, regardless of religion or any other qualification. The building is composed of 27 free-standing marble-clad "petals" arranged in clusters of three to form nine sides,[1] with nine doors opening onto a central hall with a height of slightly over 34 metres[1] and a capacity of 1,300 people.[2] The Lotus Temple has won numerous architectural awards[3][4] and has been featured in many newspaper and magazine articles.[5]
History[edit]
The architect of the Lotus Temple was an Iranian, Fariborz Sahba who now lives in La Jolla, California,[6] after spending some years in Canada.[7] He was approached in 1976 to design the Lotus Temple and later oversaw its construction. The structural design was undertaken by the British firm Flint and Neill over the course of 18 months,[8] and the construction was done by ECC Construction Group of Larsen & Toubro Limited[9][dead link] at a cost of $10.56 million.[10][11] The major part of the funds needed to buy this land was donated by Ardishír Rustampúr of Hyderabad, Sindh (Pakistan), whose will stipulated that his entire life savings would go towards the building of the temple.[12][page needed] A portion of the construction budget was saved and used to build a greenhouse to study indigenous plants and flowers that would be appropriate for use on the site.[13]
Rúhíyyih Khánum laid the foundation stone for the Lotus Temple on 19 October 1977 and dedicated the temple on 24 December 1986.[14] For the dedication, there was a gathering of 8,000 Baháʼís from 107 countries, including some 4,000 Baháʼís from 22 states in India. The temple was opened to the public on 1 January 1987 and more than 10,000 people visited that day.[15]
Worship[edit]
The Baháʼí Faith teaches that a Baháʼí House of Worship should be a space for people of all religions to gather, reflect, and worship.[16] Anyone may enter the Lotus Temple irrespective of religious background, gender, or other distinctions, as is the case with all Baháʼí Houses of Worship.[16] The sacred writings of not only the Baháʼí Faith but also other religions can be read and/or chanted, regardless of language;[16] on the other hand, reading nonscriptural texts is forbidden, as is delivering sermons or lectures, or fundraising. Musical renditions of readings and prayers can be sung by choirs, but no musical instruments can be played inside. There is no set pattern for worship services, and ritualistic ceremonies are not permitted.[16]
Structure[edit]
Interior view
Interior view of the Ringstone Symbol, set at the top of the temple
All Baháʼí Houses of Worship, including the Lotus Temple, share certain architectural elements, some of which are specified by Baháʼí scripture. ʻAbdu'l-Bahá, the son of the founder of the religion, wrote that Baháʼí Houses of Worship must be nine-sided and circular.[16] While all current Baháʼí Houses of Worship have a dome, this is not regarded as an essential part of their architecture.[14] The Baháʼí scripture also states that no pictures, statues or images may be displayed within the House of Worship, and no pulpits or altars may be incorporated as an architectural feature (readers may stand behind simple portable lecture stands).[16]
The design for the House of Worship in New Delhi is inspired by the lotus flower and is composed of 27 free-standing marble-clad "petals" arranged in clusters of three to form nine sides.[17] The temple's shape has symbolic and inter-religious significance because the lotus is often associated with purity, sacredness, spirituality, and knowledge. It has a spiritual significance in India.[3] The nine doors of the Lotus Temple open onto a central hall 34.3 metres tall[1] that can seat 1,300 people[18] and hold up to 2,500 people.[2] The temple has a diameter of 70 m.[19] The surface of the House of Worship is made of white marble from Penteli mountain in Greece, the same marble used in the construction of many ancient monuments (including the Parthenon[18]) and other Baháʼí buildings.[20] Along with its nine surrounding ponds and gardens, the Lotus Temple property comprises 26 acres (105,000 m2; 10.5 ha).[4] An educational centre beside the temple was established in 2017.[21]
The Lotus Temple is situated near the Kalkaji Mandir metro station about 500 metres away.[22] It is in the village of Bahapur in New Delhi, National Capital Territory of Delhi, near Nehru Place[23] and lies on the western bank of the Yamuna River.[24]
Of the temple's total electricity use of 500 kilowatts (kW), 120 kW is provided by solar power generated by solar panels on the building.[25] This saves the temple ₹120,000 per month.[25] It is the first temple in Delhi to use solar power.[26]
As is the case with other stone monuments such as the Taj Mahal, the Lotus Temple is becoming discoloured due to air pollution in India. Specifically, the white marble is turning grey and yellow due to pollution from vehicles and manufacturing in the city, among other sources.[27]
Visitors[edit]
By late 2001, The Lotus Temple had attracted more than 70 million visitors, according to Manpreet Brar, a CNN reporter.[28] The permanent delegation of India to UNESCO stated that the Lotus Temple had received over 100 million visitors by April 2014.[18]
The Lotus Temple has become a major attraction for people of various religions, with up to 100,000 visitors on some holidays.[3] Estimates for the number of visitors annually range from 2.5 million to 5 million.[3][17][21] Brar stated in 2001 that it was the "most visited building in the world".[28] The Lotus Temple is often listed as one of Delhi's main tourist attractions.[17]
Distinctions[edit]
Some of this section's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed. (October 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
One of the nine ponds surrounding the Lotus Temple
The Temple has received a wide range of attention in professional architectural, fine art, religious, governmental, and other venues.
Awards[edit]
1987, the architect of the Baháʼí House of Worship, Fariborz Sahba, was presented the award for excellence in religious art and architecture by the UK-based Institution of Structural Engineers for producing a building "so emulating the beauty of a flower and so striking in its visual impact".[29]
1987, the Interfaith Forum on Religion, Art and Architecture, Affiliate of the American Institute of Architects, Washington, D.C., gave their First Honour award for "Excellence in Religious Art and Architecture" 1987 to Fariborz Sahba for the design of the Baháʼí House of Worship near New Delhi.[8]
1988, the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America conferred the Paul Waterbury Special Citation for Outdoor Lighting for the "Taj Mahal of the Twentieth Century"[23]
1989, the Temple received an award from the Maharashtra-India Chapter of the American Concrete Institute for "excellence in a concrete structure".[8]
1994 edition of Encyclopædia Britannica, in its "Architecture" section gives recognition to the Temple as an outstanding achievement of the time.[8]
2000, Architectural Society of China as one of 100 canonical works of the 20th century[17] in "World Architecture 1900-2000: A Critical Mosaic, Volume Eight, South Asia".[5]
2000, GlobArt Academy, based in Vienna, Austria, presented its "GlobArt Academy 2000" award to the architect of the Lotus Temple, Fariborz Sahba, for "the magnitude of the service of [this] Taj Mahal of the 20th century in promoting the unity and harmony of people of all nations, religions and social strata, to an extent unsurpassed by any other architectural monument worldwide."[5][17]
Publications[edit]
Gardens at the Baháʼí House of Worship
Information centre at the Baháʼí House of Worship
Articles[edit]
By 2003, the Baháʼí World Centre Library had archived more than 500 publications which carried information on the Lotus Temple in the form of articles, interviews with the architect and write-ups extolling the structure.[8] The following are major examples of publications featuring articles on the temple listed chronologically, and excerpted quotations:
Progressive Architecture, February 1987[8] and December 1987
Architecture, September 1987[8]
Structural Engineer (annual UK journal), December 1987[8]
Encyclopaedia Iranica, 1989[8]
World Architecture: A Critical Mosaic 1900-2000, by Kenneth Frampton, Vol 8, 2000[30] - "A power icon of great beauty ... an import symbol of the city."
Actualité des Religions (French magazine), Fall 2000 special edition entitled "Les religions et leurs chef-d'œuvres" (Religions and their Masterpieces), four-page article[8][31]
Guinness World Records, 2001[30]
Wallpaper*, October 2002
Lighting Design + Application Vol 19, No. 6, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America - "Taj Mahal of the Twentieth Century"
Faith & Form (journal of the Interfaith Forum on Religion, Art and Architecture, an affiliate of the American Institute of Architects), Vol XXI - "An extraordinary feat of design, construction, and appropriateness of expressions"
BBC Travel, 2016, The world's most beautiful places of worship
Books[edit]
Forever in Bloom: The Lotus of Bahapur, photographs by Raghu Rai and text by Roger White, Time Books International, 1992[31]
The Dawning Place of the Remembrance of God, Thomas Press, 2002[31]
Arrests[edit]
In 2006, some former employees of the Lotus Temple made a complaint to the police that the trustees of the temple had been involved in various crimes including spying, religious conversion and producing false passports. The trial judge directed the police to arrest nine specific trustees, but the Delhi High Court later stayed the arrests.[32][33]
Gallery[edit]
The Baháʼí House of Worship in Delhi at night
People outside the Lotus Temple
Model of the temple at the information centre
Full view of the Lotus Temple
The Lotus Temple with trees in front
Some of the displays about the Baháʼí teaching of the unity of religion at the entrance of the information centre
Greenery in front of the temple
The Lotus Temple at sunset
Drone shot of The Lotus Temple, 2023

Qutb Minar
Minar in Delhi, India
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Coordinates 28.524355°N 77.185248°E
Height 72.5 metres (238 ft)
Architectural style(s) Islamic Architecture
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Type Cultural
Criteria 4
Designated 1993 (17th session)
Reference no. 233
Country  India
Continent Asia
Construction Started in 1199 by Qutb ud-Din Aibak / completed in ~ 1220 by his son-in-law Iltutmish[1][2]
The Qutb Minar, also spelled Qutub Minar and Qutab Minar, is a minaret and "victory tower" that forms part of the Qutb complex, which lies at the site of Delhi's oldest fortified city, Lal Kot, founded by the Tomar Rajputs. It consists of 399 steps [3] It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site in the Mehrauli area of South Delhi, India.[4][5] It is one of the most visited tourist spots in the city, mostly built between 1199 and 1220.[6][7][4]
It can be compared to the 62-metre all-brick Minaret of Jam in Afghanistan, of c. 1190, which was constructed a decade or so before the probable start of the Delhi tower.[8] The surfaces of both are elaborately decorated with inscriptions and geometric patterns. The Qutb Minar has a shaft that is fluted with "superb stalactite bracketing under the balconies" at the top of each stage.[9][10][11] In general, minarets were slow to be used in India and are often detached from the main mosque where they exist.[12]
In recent years, the Qutub Minar has been illuminated for special occasions involving international relations. In September 2023, the monument was lit up in the colors of the Mexican flag to celebrate Mexico's 213th Independence Day, an event that was acknowledged and appreciated by the Embassy of Mexico in India.[13] Similarly, on October 30, the Qutub Minar was illuminated with the Turkish flag to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Republic of Turkey, an occasion that received special attention from the Turkish Embassy in New Delhi.[14]
Architecture
The tower includes elements of traditional Islamic architecture and southwestern Asian design. Elizabeth Lambourn's Islam Beyond Empires: Mosques and Islamic Landscapes in India and the Indian Ocean studies the introduction of Islam in South Asia and how the region influenced the Islamic religious architecture.[15] These newly arrived Muslims from the Islamic West escaped the Mongol Empire and emigrated to India, where they constructed religious centers. The Qutb Minar serves as a central marker to these new Muslim communities as well as being a reminder of Islam's presence in the area.[15] The architecture of the minaret varies greatly from that of the typical style and design of the mosques constructed in the Middle East. The style of these structures is influenced by the local architecture such as the Indic temples. This affected the different materials, techniques, and decoration that were used in the construction of the Qutb Minar.[15]
Historically, tower minarets were uncommon in South Asian-Islamic design until the 17th century, due to the slow adoption of the typical Middle Eastern style in India.[15] It is also detached from the main mosque, showcasing how the native culture affected the design of a Middle Eastern structure.[12] The Qutb Minar is seen as the "earliest and best example of a fusion or synthesis of Hindu-Muslim traditions" according to Ved Parkash in his essay The Qutb Minar from Contemporary and Near Contemporary Sources.[15] Like many mosques built in South Asia during this time period, the minaret was constructed by Hindu laborers and craftsmen but overseen by Muslim architects.[15] This led to a construction that synthesized both Hindu and Islamic religious architecture. Since some of the craftsmen were Hindu and unfamiliar with the Quran, the inscriptions are a compilation of disarranged Quranic texts and other Arabic expressions.[15]
History
The Qutb Minar was built over the ruins of the Lal Kot, the citadel of Dhillika.[7] Qutub Minar was begun after the Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque. Drawing references from their Ghurid homeland, Qutub-ud-Din Aibak and Shamsu’d-Din Iltutmish constructed a minar (minaret) at the south-eastern corner of the Quwwatu’l-Islam between 1199 and 1503.[16]
Kuttull Minor, Delhi. The Qutb Minar, 1805.
It is usually thought that the tower is named for Qutb-ud-din Aibak, who began it. It is also possible that it is named after Khwaja Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki a 13th-century sufi saint, because Shamsuddin Iltutmish was a devotee of his.[17]
The Minar is surrounded by several historically significant monuments of the Qutb complex. Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque, to the north-east of the Minar was built by Qutub-ud-Din Aibak in A.D. 1199. It is the earliest extant - mosque built by the Delhi Sultans. It consists of a rectangular courtyard enclosed by cloisters, erected with the carved columns and architectural members of 27 Jain and Hindu temples, which were demolished by Qutub-ud-Din Aibak as recorded in his inscription on the main eastern entrance.[18] Later, a lofty arched screen was erected, and the mosque was enlarged, by Shams-ud- Din Itutmish (A.D. 1210–35) and Ala-ud-Din Khalji. The Iron Pillar in the courtyard bears an inscription in Sanskrit in Brahmi script of fourth century A.D., according to which the pillar was set up as a Vishnudhvaja (standard of god Vishnu) on the hill known as Vishnupada in memory of a mighty king named Chandra.[18]
The mosque complex is one of the earliest that survives in the Indian subcontinent.[6][7]
The nearby pillared cupola known as "Smith's Folly" is a remnant of the tower's 19th century restoration, which included an ill-advised attempt to add some more stories.[19][20]
In 1505, an earthquake damaged Qutub Minar; it was repaired by Sikander Lodi. On 1 September 1803, a major earthquake caused serious damage. Major Robert Smith of the British Indian Army renovated the tower in 1828 and installed a pillared cupola over the fifth story, creating a sixth. The cupola was taken down in 1848, under instructions from The Viscount Hardinge, who was the Governor General of India. at the time. It was reinstalled at ground level to the east of Qutb Minar, where it remains. This is known as "Smith's Folly".[21]
It was added to the list of World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1993.
The Ghurids
Decorative motifs on upper levels
The construction of the Qutb Minar was planned and financed by the Ghurids, who emigrated to India and brought Islam with them. The Ghurids, historically known as the Shansabanis, were a clan of Tajik origin that hailed from Ghur, the mountainous region of modern-day western Afghanistan.[22] In the late eleventh century to the early twelfth century, the different sects of this nomadic clan united, losing its nomadic culture. During this time, they also converted to Islam.[22]
They then expanded into modern-day India and quickly took control of a substantial part of the country.[22] The Ghurids annexed the Multan and Uch in the western Punjab in 1175–76, the northwestern regions around Peshawar in 1177, and the region of Sindh in 1185–86. In 1193, Qutb al-Din Aibak conquered Delhi and implemented a Ghurid governorship in the province, and the congregational mosque, the Qutb Minar complex, was founded in 1193.[22] In the past, scholars believed that the complex was constructed to promote a conversion to Islam amongst the Ghurids' new subjects as well as a symbol of the Ghurids' adherence to a socio-religious system.[22] There is now new information to suggest that conversion to Islam was not a top priority of the new annexes and instead the Ghurid governors sought to make a synthesis of the local culture and Islam through negotiation.[22]
Patrons and architects
Qutb-ud-din Aibak, a deputy of Muhammad of Ghor, who founded the Delhi Sultanate after Muhammad of Ghor's death, started construction of the Qutb Minar's first story in 1199. Aibak's successor and son-in-law Shamsuddin Iltutmish completed a further three stories.[17] After a lightning strike in 1369 damaged the then top story, the ruler at the time, Firuz Shah Tughlaq, replaced the damaged story and added one more. Sher Shah Suri also added an entrance while he was ruling and the Mughal emperor Humayun was in exile.[1]
Architecture
Qutb Minar in Mehrauli in Delhi. Clifton and Co., around 1890
Persian-Arabic and Nagari in different sections of the Qutb Minar reveal the history of its construction and the later restorations and repairs by Firuz Shah Tughlaq (1351–88) and Sikandar Lodi (1489–1517).[23]
The height of Qutb Minar is 72.5 meters, making it the tallest minaret in the world built of bricks.[2][24] The tower tapers, and has a 14.3 metres (47 feet) base diameter, reducing to 2.7 metres (9 feet) at the top of the peak.[25] It contains a spiral staircase of 379 steps.[26][1]
At the foot of the tower is the Quwat Ul Islam Mosque. The Minar tilts just over 65 cm from the vertical, which is considered to be within safe limits.[27]
Qutb Minar was an inspiration and prototype for many minarets and towers built. The Chand Minar and Mini Qutub Minar bear resemblance to the Qutb Minar and inspired from it.[28]
Levels
The stories of the Qutb Minar vary in size, style, and material due to varying architects and builders constructing each section.
Inscriptions near the base
Basement
The Qutb Minar consists of five stories of red and grey sandstone. The lowest story, also known as the basement story, was completed during the lifetime of Ghiyath al-Din Muhammad, a sultan of the Ghurid dynasty.[29]
It is revetted with twelve semicircular and twelve flanged pilasters that are placed in alternating order.[29] This story is separated by flanges and by storied balconies, carried on Muqarnas corbels.[26] The story is placed on top of a low circular plinth that is inscribed with a twelve-pointed star with a semicircle placed with each of the angles between the star's points.[29]
There are also six horizontal bands with inscriptions inscribed in naskh, a style of Islamic calligraphy, on this story. The inscriptions are as follows: Quran, sura II, verses 255–60; Quran, sura LIX, verses 22–23, and attributes of God; The name and titles of Ghiyath al-Din; Quran, sura XLVIII, verses 1–6; The name and titles of Mu’izz al-Din; and Qur’anic quotations and the following titles in this much restored inscription: "The Amir, the most glorious and great commander of the army."[29] This level also has inscriptions praising Muhammad of Ghor, the sultan of the Ghurids.[17]
Second, third, and fourth stories
The second, third, and fourth stories were erected by Sham ud-Din Iltutmish, the first Muslim sovereign to rule from Delhi.[30] He is considered to be the first of the Delhi Sultan dynastic line.[30] The second and third stories are also revetted with twelve semicircular and twelve flanged pilasters that are placed in alternating order.[29] These red sandstone columns are separated by flanges and by storied balconies, carried on Muqarnas corbels.[26] Prior to its reconstruction and reduction, the fourth story was also decorated with semicircular pilasters.[29] It was re-constructed in white marble and is relatively plain.[26]
Fifth story
In 1369, the fourth story was repaired after lightning struck the minaret. During reconstruction, Sultan Firuz Shah Tughlaq elected to reduce the size of the fourth story and then separated it into two stories.[30]
Controversy
Close-up of balcony
On 14 November 2000, Delhi newspapers reported that the Hindu nationalist groups, Vishva Hindu Parishad and Bajrang Dal, planned to host a yajna, a ritualistic Hindu ceremony related to cleansing or purification, at the Qutub Minar complex where the minaret is located.[18] The Delhi police detained 80 activists led by Ram Krishan Gaur that were located by the Qutb Minar and were stopped from performing the yajna inside the tower. Due to a police barricade, the activists instead performed the ritual on the streets outside the mosque complex.[31] Since the spolia of Jain and Hindu temples were used to construct the minaret, the right-wing Hindu groups believed that they needed to perform a cleansing at the complex in order to free the Hindu icons that were "trapped" in the minaret and the mosque complex.[18]
On 18 May 2022, a former Regional Director of Archaeological Survey of India, Dharamveer Sharma, has claimed that Qutb Minar was built by Raja Vikramaditya in the fifth century to observe the changing position of the sun.[32]
On 21 May 2022, The Secretary at the Ministry of Culture, Govind Mohan, decided to conduct excavation and iconography of idols found at Qutub Minar. The Ministry has now asked the ASI to submit an excavation report. Excavation can be started in the south of the minaret at a distance of 15 meters from the mosque.[33]
Accidents
Entrance to Minar
On 8 December 1946 Tara Devi, a Czech actress and the sixth wife of maharaja Jagatjit Singh, fell from the tower to her death with her two Pomeranian dogs.[34][35]
Before 1976, the general public was allowed access to the first floor of the minaret, via the internal staircase. Access to the top was stopped after 2000 due to suicides.
On 4 December 1981, the staircase lighting failed. Between 300 and 400 visitors stampeded towards the exit. 45 were killed and some were injured. Most of these were school children.[36] Since then, the tower has been closed to the public. Since this incident the rules regarding entry have been stringent.[37]
In literature
Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poem, The Cootub Minar, Delhi. is a reflection on a picture by Samuel Prout in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1833.[38]
In popular culture
Bollywood actor and director Dev Anand wanted to shoot the song "Dil Ka Bhanwar Kare Pukar" from his film Tere Ghar Ke Samne inside the Minar. However, the cameras in that era were too big to fit inside the tower's narrow passage, and therefore the song was shot inside a replica of the Qutb Minar.[39]
The site served as the Pit Stop of the second leg of the second series of The Amazing Race Australia.[40]
A picture of the minaret is featured on the travel cards and tokens issued by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. A recently launched start-up in collaboration with the Archaeological Survey of India has made a 360o walkthrough of Qutb Minar available.[41]
Ministry of Tourism recently gave seven companies the 'Letters of Intent' for fourteen monuments under its 'Adopt a Heritage Scheme.' These companies will be the future 'Monument Mitras.' Qutb Minar has been chosen to part of that list.[42][43]
Gallery
Qutb Minar
Left to Right:Alai Darwaza, Qutb Minar, Imam Zamin's tomb
Plaque at Minar
View through arch
Qutb Minar path view
Qutb Minar from the south
Ruined god Ganesha stone Relief

"Viceroy's House" redirects here. For the film, see Viceroy's House (film).
For a similar structure in Nepal, see Rastrapati Bhawan.
Rashtrapati Bhavan
Rāṣṭrapati Bhavan
Official logo
Top: the Presidential Palace's forecourt with T shaped ceremonial reception ground facing the Jaipur Column
Bottom: the Presidential Palace's backyard with square shaped central lawn facing the Amrit Udyan Gardens
Location in New Delhi, Delhi, India
Former names Viceroy's House (until 1947)
Government House (1947–1950)
Alternative names Presidential House
General information
Architectural style Delhi Order[1]
Location Rajpath, Raisina Hill, New Delhi
Address Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi, India – 110 004
Town or city New Delhi
Country  India
Coordinates 28°36′52″N 77°11′59″E
Current tenants
Droupadi Murmu
(President of India)
Construction started 1912; 112 years ago
Completed 1929; 95 years ago[2]
Opened 1931; 93 years ago
Owner Government of India
Height 55 meters
Technical details
Size 130 hectare (321 acre)
Floor count Four
Floor area 200,000 sq ft (19,000 m2)
Design and construction
Architect(s) Sir Edwin Lutyens
Other information
Number of rooms 340
Website
rashtrapatisachivalaya.gov.in
Short film about Rashtrapati Bhavan
The Rashtrapati Bhavan (pronunciationⓘ, IAST: Rāṣṭrapati Bhavan; lit. 'Presidential Palace'; previously Viceroy's House) is the official residence of the President of India at the western end of Rajpath, Raisina Hill, New Delhi, India. It was formerly known as Viceroy's House and constructed during the zenith of British Empire. Rashtrapati Bhavan may refer to only the 340-room main building that has the president's official residence, including reception halls, guest rooms and offices, also called the mansion; it may also refer to the entire 130-hectare (320-acre) Presidential Estate that additionally includes the presidential gardens, large open spaces, residences of bodyguards and staff, stables, other offices and utilities within its perimeter walls. In terms of area, it is the second largest residence of any head of state in the world after Quirinal Palace in Italy.[3] The other presidential homes are the Rashtrapati Nilayam in Hyderabad, Telangana and The Retreat Building in Shimla, Himachal Pradesh.
History[edit]
The Governor-General of India resided at Government House in Calcutta until the shift of the imperial capital to Delhi. Lord Wellesley, who is reputed to have said that ‘India should be governed from a palace, not from a country house’, ordered the construction of this grand mansion between 1799 and 1803 and in 1912, the Governor of Bengal took up residence there. The decision to build a residence in New Delhi for the British Viceroy was taken after it was decided during the Delhi Durbar in December 1911 that the capital of India would be relocated from Calcutta to Delhi. When the plan for a new city, New Delhi, adjacent to the end south of Old Delhi, was developed after the Delhi Durbar, the new palace for the Viceroy of India was given an enormous size and prominent position. About 4,000 acres (1,600 ha) of land was acquired to begin the construction of Viceroy's House, as it was originally called, and adjacent Secretariat Building between 1911 and 1916 by relocating Raisina and Malcha villages that existed there and their 300 families under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.[4][5]
The sloping approach from the east, which hides the lower part of the building, as Lutyens feared.
The British architect Edwin Landseer Lutyens, a major member of the city-planning process, was given the primary architectural responsibility. The completed Governor-General's palace turned out very similar to the original sketches which Lutyens sent Herbert Baker, from Shimla, on 14 June 1912. Lutyens' design is grandly classical overall, with colours and details inspired by Indo-Saracenic architecture. Lutyens and Baker, who had been assigned to work on Viceroy's House and the Secretariats, began on friendly terms. Baker had been assigned to work on the two secretariat buildings which were in front of the Viceroy's House. The original plan was to have Viceroy's House on the top of Raisina Hill, with the secretariats lower down. It was later decided to build it 400 yards back and put both buildings on top of the plateau.[5]
Lutyens campaigned for its fixing but was not able to get it to be changed. Lutyens wanted to make a long inclined grade to Viceroy's House with retaining walls on either side. While this would give a view of the house from further back, it would also cut through the square between the secretariat buildings. The committee with Lutyens and Baker established in January 1914 said the grade was to be no steeper than 1 in 25, though it eventually was changed to 1 in 22, a steeper gradient which made it more difficult to see the Viceroy's palace. While Lutyens knew about the gradient and the possibility that the Viceroy's palace would be obscured by the road, it is thought that Lutyens did not fully realise how little the front of the house would be visible. In 1916 the Imperial Delhi committee dismissed Lutyens's proposal to alter the gradient. Lutyens thought Baker was more concerned with making money and pleasing the government, rather than making a good architectural design.[5] The land was owned by Basakha Singh and mostly Sir Sobha Singh.[6]
Lutyens travelled between India and England almost every year for twenty years and worked on the construction of the Viceroy's House in both countries. Lutyens reduced the building from 13,000,000 cubic feet (370,000 m3) to 8,500,000 cubic feet (240,000 m3) because of budget restrictions.[5]
The gardens were initially designed and laid out in Mughal style by William Robert Mustoe who was influenced by Lady Hardinge who in turn had sought inspiration in the book by Constance Villiers-Stuart in her Gardens of the Great Mughals (1913). The designs underwent changes and alterations under subsequent viceroys and after Indian Independence.[7] After independence, it was renamed as Government House.[8]
When Chakravarti Rajagopalachari assumed office as the first India-born Governor General of India and became the occupant of this palace, he preferred to stay in a few rooms in the former Guest Wing, which is now the family wing of the President; he converted the then Viceroy's apartments into the Guest Wing, where visiting heads of state stay while in India.[5]
On 26 January 1950, when Rajendra Prasad became the first President of India and occupied this building, it was renamed Rashtrapati Bhavan – the President's House.[9]
Architecture[edit]
Design[edit]
Consisting of four floors and 340 rooms, with a floor area of 200,000 square feet (19,000 m2), it was built using 700 million bricks and 3,000,000 cu ft (85,000 m3) of stone with little steel.[10]
The design of the building fell into the period of the Edwardian Baroque, a time at which emphasis was placed on the use of heavy classical motifs to emphasise power. The design process of the mansion was long, complicated and politically charged. Lutyens' early designs were all starkly classical and entirely European in style, although he wished to do it in classical Indian style- India never had a uniform architecture for public use. In the post-Mutiny era, however, it was decided that sensitivity must be shown to the local surroundings to better integrate the building within its political context, and after much political debate, Lutyens conceded to incorporating local Indo-Saracenic motifs, albeit in a rather superficial decoration form on the skin of the building.[11]
Various Indian elements were added to the building. These included several circular stone basins on top of the building, as water features are an important part of Indian architecture. There was also a traditional Indian chujja or chhajja, which occupied the place of a frieze in classical architecture; it was a sharp, thin, protruding element which extended 8 feet (2.4 m) from the building, and created deep shadows. It blocks harsh sunlight from the windows and also shields the windows from heavy rain during the monsoon season. On the roofline were several chuttris, which helped to break up the flatness of the roofline not covered by the dome. Lutyens appropriated some Indian design elements but used them sparingly and effectively throughout the building.[11]
The column has a "distinctly peculiar crown on top, a glass star springing out of bronze lotus blossom".[12]
There were pierced screens in red sandstone, called jalis or jaalis,[13] inspired by Rajasthani designs. The front of the palace, on the east side, has twelve unevenly spaced massive columns with the Delhi Order capitals, a "nonce order" Lutyens invented for this building, with Ashokan details.[14] The capitals have a fusion of acanthus leaves with the four pendant Indian bells. The bells are similar in style to Indian Hindu and Buddhist temples, the idea is inspired by a Jain temple at Moodabidri in Karnataka.[15]
One bell is on each corner at the top of the column. As there is an ancient Indian belief that bells signalled the end of a dynasty, it was said that as the bells were silent British rule in India would not end.[14]
Whereas previous British examples of so-called Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture had mostly grafted elements from Mughal architecture onto essentially Western carcasses, Lutyens drew also from the much earlier Buddhist Mauryan art. This can be seen in the Dehli Order, and in the main dome, where the drum below has decoration recalling the railings around early Buddhist stupas such as Sanchi.[16] There is also the presence of Mughal and European colonial architectural elements. Overall the structure is distinctly different from other contemporary British Colonial symbols, although other New Delhi buildings, such as the Secretariat Building, New Delhi, mainly by Herbert Baker, have similarities e.g. both are built with cream and red Dholpur sandstone.[17]
Lutyens added several small personal elements to the house, such as an area in the garden walls and two ventilator windows on the stateroom to look like the glasses which he wore. The Viceregal Lodge was completed largely by 1929, and (along with the rest of New Delhi) inaugurated officially in 1931. Between 1932 and 1933 important decorations were added, especially in the ballroom, and executed by the Italian painter Tommaso Colonnello.[18]
Main facade
It has 355 decorated rooms and a floor area of 200,000 square feet (19,000 m2). The structure includes 700 million bricks[19] and 3.5 million cubic feet (85,000 m³) of stone, with only minimal usage of steel. Lutyens established ateliers in Delhi and Lahore to employ local craftsmen. The chief engineer of the project was Sir Teja Singh Malik, and four main contractors included Sir Sobha Singh.[20]
Jaipur Column There were also statues of elephants and fountain sculptures of cobras, as well as the bas-reliefs around the base of the Jaipur Column, made by British sculptor, Charles Sargeant Jagger.[21] from west with north block at Rashtrapati Bhawan
Layout plan[edit]
The layout plan of the building is designed around a massive square with multiple courtyards and open inner areas within. The plan called for two wings; one for the Viceroy and residents and another for guests. The residence wing is a separate four-storey house in itself, with its court areas within. This wing was so large that the last Indian governor-general, Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, opted to live in the smaller guest wing, a tradition followed by subsequent presidents. The original residence wing is now used primarily for state receptions and as a guest wing for visiting heads of state.[2]
Halls and rooms[edit]
Durbar Hall is situated directly under the double-dome of the main building. Known as the "Throne Room" before independence, it had two separate thrones for the Viceroy and Vicereine. Since Indian Independence, a single high chair for the President is kept here under a Belgian glass chandelier hanging from a height of 33 m. The flooring of the hall is made of chocolate-coloured Italian marble. The columns in Durbar Hall are made in Delhi Order which combines vertical lines with the motif of a bell. The vertical lines from the column were also used in the frieze around the room, which could not have been done with one of the traditional Greek orders of columns. The columns are made from yellow Jaisalmer marble, with a thick line running along the centre.[22]
Durbar Hall has a capacity of 500 people and it is here in this building that Jawaharlal Nehru took the oath of office of Prime Minister from Lord Mountbatten at 8.30 am on 15 August 1947.[22]
Ashoka Hall is a rectangular room of 32×20 m. It was originally built as a state ballroom with wooden flooring. The Persian painting on its ceiling depicts a royal hunting expedition led by King Fateh Ali Shah of Persia. The walls have fresco paintings.[23]
Main gate of Rashtrapati Bhawan with Jaipur Column in background.
Dome[edit]
Rayapati Sambasiva Rao, Member of Parliament, presenting U.S. President Barack Obama with a scarf during the State Dinner receiving line at Rashtrapati Bhawan, 2015
The dome, in the middle, reflects both Indian and British styles. In the centre is a tall copper-faced dome, surmounting a very tall drum in several sections, which stands out from the rest of the building. The dome is exactly in the middle of the diagonals between the four corners of the building. It is more than twice the height of the building itself and combines classical and Indian styles. Lutyens considered the Pantheon in Rome as a model when designing the dome, although the exterior of the dome was also modelled partly after the early Buddhist stupas.[24]
Garden[edit]
'Amrit Udyan' (meaning: The Garden of the Holy Nectar) is a garden situated at the back of the Rashtrapati Bhavan. Formerly known as the 'Mughal Gardens', it incorporates both Mughal and English landscaping styles and feature a great variety of flowers and trees.[25] The Rashtrapati Bhavan gardens are open to the public in February–March every year during Udyanotsav.[26]
Main garden: Two channels intersecting at right angles running in the cardinal directions divide this garden into a grid of squares: a charbagh. There are six lotus-shaped fountains at the crossings of these channels, rising to a height of 12 feet (3.7 m). There are bird tables for feeding grain to wild birds.[27]
Terrace garden: There are two longitudinal strips of the garden, at a higher level on each side of the Main Garden, forming the Northern and Southern boundaries. The plants grown are the same as in the Main Garden. At the centre of both of the strips is a fountain, which falls inwards, forming a well. On the Western tips are located two gazebos and on the Eastern tips are two ornately designed sentry posts.[28]
A fountain in the Amrit Udyan.
Long Garden or the 'Purdah Garden': This is located to the West of the Main Garden, and runs along each side of the central pavement which goes to the circular garden. Enclosed in walls about 12 feet high, this is predominantly a rose garden. It has 16 square rose beds encased in low hedges. There is a red sandstone pergola in the centre over the central pavement which is covered with Rose creepers, Petrea, Bougainvillea and vines. The walls are covered with creepers like jasmine, Rhynchospermum, Tecoma Grandiflora, Bignonia Vanista, Adenoclyma, Echitice, Parana Paniculata. Along the walls are planted the China Orange trees.[28]
Museum[edit]
In July 2014, a museum inside Rashtrapati Bhavan was inaugurated by then President of India Pranab Mukherjee. The museum helps visitors to get an inside view of the Rashtrapati Bhavan, its art, architecture and get educated about lives of past presidents.[29] The second phase was inaugurated in 2016 by the President Pranab Mukherjee and the Prime Minister Narendra Modi.[30] The museum has been built under the guidance of Saroj Ghose.[30]
Restoration[edit]
The first restoration project at the Rashtrapati Bhavan was started in 1985 and ended in 1989, during which the Ashoka Hall was stripped of its later additions and restored to its original state by the architectural restorer Sunita Kohli. The second restoration project, begun in 2010, involved Charles Correa and Sunita Kohli.[20][31][32]
Gallery[edit]
US First Lady Melania Trump at Rashtrapati Bhavan
A banquet at the President's House
US President Trump and the US First Lady at Rashtrapati Bhavan
Rashtrapati Bhavan
illuminated for Indian Republic Day
Rashtrapati Bhavan night view
Visuals of Rashtrapati Bhavan

Look for Red Fort (Lal Quila) on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Red Fort (Lal Quila) in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Red Fort (Lal Quila)" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look up hi:अक्षरधाम in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Akshardham may refer to:
Akshardham (religion), Purushottam's eternal transcendental abode in the Swaminarayan sect of Hinduism
Swaminarayan Akshardham (Delhi), or Akshardham Temple, a Hindu temple complex in Delhi, India
Akshardham metro station
Swaminarayan Akshardham (Gandhinagar), a Hindu temple complex in Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
Akshardham metro station (Gandhinagar)
Akshardham Temple attack, 2002
Swaminarayan Akshardham (North America), a Hindu temple complex in Robbinsville, New Jersey, United States

Agra Fort
Agra Fort
Location Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India
Area 38 ha (94 acres)
Architectural style(s) Mughal
Owner
Lodi Dynasty (1504–1526)
Mughal Empire (1526–1540)
Suri Dynasty (1540–1555)
Mughal Empire (1556–1761)
Bharatpur State (1761–1774)
Mughal Empire (1774–1785)
Maratha Confederacy (1785–1803)
British Government (1803–1947)
Government of India (1947–present day)
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Criteria Cultural: (iii)
Reference 251
Inscription 1984 (8th Session)
Coordinates 27°10′46″N 78°01′16″E
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Map of Agra Fort
The Agra Fort (Qila Agra) is a historical fort in the city of Agra, and also known as Agra's Red Fort. Mughal emperor Humayun was crowned at this fort. It was later renovated by the Mughal emperor Akbar from 1565 and the present-day structure was completed in 1573. It served as the main residence of the rulers of the Mughal dynasty until 1638, when the capital was shifted from Agra to Delhi. It was also known as the "Lal-Qila" or "Qila-i-Akbari".[1] Before being captured by the British, the last Indian rulers to have occupied it were the Marathas. In 1983, the Agra fort was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site because of its importance during the Mughal Dynasty.[2] It is about 2.5 kilometers (1.6 mi) northwest of its more famous sister monument, the Taj Mahal. The fort can be more accurately described as a walled city. It was later renovated by Shah Jahan.
Like the rest of Agra, the history of Agra Fort prior to Mahmud of Ghazni's invasion is unclear. However, in the 15th century, the Chauhan Rajputs occupied it. Soon after, Agra assumed the status of capital when Sikandar Khan Lodi (1487–1517 CE) shifted his capital from Delhi and constructed a few buildings in the preexisting fort at Agra. After the first battle of Panipat (1526 CE), Mughals captured the fort and ruled from it. In 1530 CE, Humayun was crowned in it. The fort was given its present appearance during the reign of Akbar (1556–1605 CE). Later, this fort was under the rule of Jats of Bharatpur for 13 years.
History[edit]
Agra Fort captured by Hemu before the Battle of Delhi (1556)
Samuel Bourne, "The Fort. Delhi Gate. Agra", 1863–1869, photograph mounted on cardboard sheet, Department of Image Collections, National Gallery of Art Library, Washington, D.C.
After the First Battle of Panipat in 1526, Babur stayed in the fort, in the palace of Ibrahim Lodi. He later built a baoli (step well) in it. His successor, Humayun, was crowned in the fort in 1530. He was defeated at Bilgram in 1540 by Sher Shah Suri. The fort remained with the Suris till 1555, when Humayun recaptured it. Adil Shah Suri's general, Hemu, recaptured Agra in 1556 and pursued its fleeing governor to Delhi where he met the Mughals in the Battle of Tughlaqabad.[3]
Diwan-i-Aam, Hall of Public Audience
Realising the importance of its central situation, Akbar made it his capital and arrived in Agra in 1558. His historian, Abul Fazl, recorded that this was a brick fort known as 'Badalgarh'. It was in a ruined condition and Akbar had it rebuilt with red sandstone from Barauli area Dhaulpur district, in Rajasthan.[4] Architects laid the foundation and it was built with bricks in the inner core with sandstone on external surfaces. Some 4,000 builders worked on it daily for eight years, completing it in 1573.[5][6]
It was only during the reign of Akbar's grandson, Shah Jahan, that the site took on its current state. Shah Jahan built the Taj Mahal in the memory of his wife, Mumtaz Mahal. Unlike his grandfather, Shah Jahan tended to have buildings made from white marble. When Aurangzeb was victorious among his all brothers, then he imprisoned Shah Jahan in 1658 in the same fort only.
The fort was under the Jat rulers of Bharatpur for 13 years. In the fort, they built the 'Ratan Singh ki Haveli'. The fort was invaded and captured by the Maratha Empire in the early 18th century. Thereafter, it changed hands between the Marathas and their foes many times. After their catastrophic defeat at Third Battle of Panipat by Ahmad Shah Abdali in 1761, Marathas remained out of the region for the next decade. Finally Mahadji Shinde took the fort in 1785. It was lost by the Marathas to the British during the Second Anglo-Maratha War in 1803.[4] The fort was the site of a battle during the Indian rebellion of 1857 which caused the end of the British East India Company's rule in India and led to a century of direct rule in India by Britain.[4][7]
Scene of the gunpowder explosion at Agra Fort, 29 November 1871
On 30 November 1871, thirty six people died when a cartridge factory located inside the fort exploded.[8]
Layout[edit]
Plan of the Red Fort, Agra, from Murray's Handbooks for Travellers 1911
The 380,000 m2 (94-acre) fort has a semicircular plan, its chord lies parallel to the river Yamuna and its walls are seventy feet high. Double ramparts have massive circular bastions at intervals, with battlements, embrasures, machicolations and string courses. Four gates were provided on its four sides, one Khizri gate opening on to the river. Two of the fort's gates are notable: the "Delhi Gate" and the "Lahore Gate". The Lahore Gate is also popularly also known as the "Amar Singh Gate," for Amar Singh Rathore.[4]
The monumental Delhi Gate, which faces the city on the western side of the fort, is considered the grandest of the four gates and a masterpiece of Akbar's time. It was built circa 1568 both to enhance security and as the king's formal gate, and includes features related to both. It is embellished with intricate inlay work in white marble. A wooden drawbridge was used to cross the moat and reach the gate from the mainland; inside, an inner gateway called Hathi Pol ("Elephant Gate") – guarded by two life-sized stone elephants with their riders – added another layer of security. The drawbridge, slight ascent, and 90-degree turn between the outer and inner gates make the entrance impregnable. During a siege, attackers would employ elephants to crush a fort's gates. Without a level, straight run-up to gather speed, however, that is prevented by this layout.[9]
The northern portion of the fort is still used by the Indian military (the Parachute Brigade in particular), so the Delhi Gate cannot be used by the public. Tourists enter via the Amar Singh Gate.[citation needed]
The site is very important in terms of architectural history. Abul Fazal recorded that five hundred buildings in the designs of Bengal and Gujarat were built in the fort. Some of them were demolished by Shah Jahan to make way for his white marble palaces. Most of the others were destroyed by the British troops of East India Company between 1803 and 1862 for raising barracks. Hardly thirty Mughal buildings have survived on the south-eastern side, facing the river, such as the Delhi Gate and Akbar Gate and one palace – "Bengali Mahal".
Akbar Darwazza (Akbar Gate) was renamed Amar Singh Gate by Shah Jahan. The gate is similar in design to the Delhi Gate. Both are built of red sandstone.[4]
The Bengali Mahal is built of red sandstone and is now split into Akbari Mahal and Jahangiri Mahal.[10]
Historical sites[edit]
Jahangir's Hauz, 1916–18
Jahangir's Hauz (tank) (1610 AD): this monolithic tank (hauz) was used for bathing. It is 5 feet high, 8 feet in diameter and 25 feet in circumference. On the external side of the rim there is an inscription in Persian which mentions it as Hauz-e-Jahangir. It was first discovered near the courtyard of Akbar's palace. In 1843 AD and later it was placed in front of Diwan-e-Am. In 1862, it was shifted to public garden (Company Bagh) where it suffered much damage. Later, Sir John Marshall brought it back to Agra Fort and placed there. Due to this hauz, the palace became famous as Jahangiri Mahal though it is part of Akbar's Bengali mahal.
Shahjahani Mahal (1628–35 AD): it is situated in between the white marble Khas Mahal and the red stone Jahangiri Mahal and is set transitionally in between these two residential complexes of two different ages. It is the earliest attempt of the Mughal emperor Shahjahan to convert an existing red stone building in accordance with his taste and it was his earliest palace in Agra Fort. It has a large hall, side rooms and an octagonal tower on the riverside. The skeletal construction of brick and red stone was all redone with a thick white stucco plaster and colourfully painted in floral designs. The whole palace once glistened white like white marble. On the face towards the Khas Mahal, is a large spacious white marble dalan, composed of five arches, supported on double pillars and protected externally by a chhajja. Its closed western bay houses, the Ghaznin gate, Babur's baoli and a well are situated beneath it.
The Ghaznin Gate, taken in 1842 from the tomb of Mahmud of Ghazni in Ghazni, Afghanistan
Ghaznin Gate (1030 AD): the gate originally belonged to the tomb of Mahmud Ghaznavi at Ghazni. It was brought from there by the British in 1842. Lord Ellenborough, the Governor General, in historic proclamation claimed, that these were the sandalwood gates of Somnath which Mahmud had taken to Ghazni in 1025, and the British had thus avenged an insult of 800 years back. This false claim was made just to win the goodwill of the Indian people. The gate is, in fact, made of local deodar wood of Ghazni and not of sandalwood. The style of decoration bears no resemblance to ancient Gujrati woodwork. There is also an Arabic inscription carved on the upper part. It mentions Mahmud with his epithets. Sir John Marshall had placed here a notice-board which described the whole episode about this gate. It is 16.5 feet high and 13.5 feet broad and its wight is about half a ton. It is made up of geometrical, hexagonal and octagonal panels which have been fixed, one with the help of the other into the frame without rivets. The idea to restore it at Somnath was ultimately given up and the gate was abandoned. Since then, it is stored in a room.[11]
Jahangir's Chain of Justice (c. 1605 AD): this is the spot where Mughal king Jahangir instituted his 'chain of justice'(Zanjir-i-Adl) in c. 1605 AD. He records in his memoir that after his accession, the first order he gave, "was for the fastening up of the chain of justice so that if those engaged in the administration of justice should delay or practice hypocrisy, the aggrieved might come to this chain and shake it so that its noise might attract my attention". It was made of pure gold. It was 80' in length and had 60 bells. Its weight was 1 Quintal. One end was fastened to the battlements of the Shah-Burj and the other end to a stone post on the bank of the river. This is not a myth. Contemporary foreign travellers like William Hawkins personally saw it. It has also been depicted in a contemporary painting made in 1620 AD. This was a way to redress the grievances of the people who could approach the king, the highest judicial authority of the empire, directly, without fee, fear or formality for immediate relief. There was no distinction of caste or creed or between poor and rich. Jahangir's administration of justice 'Adl-i-Jahangir' became a legend in Indian history.
The Muthamman Burj (Shah-Burj) & Jharokha (1632–1640 AD): this palace surmounts the largest bastion of Agra Fort on the riverside, facing the East. It was originally built of red stone by Akbar who used it for jharokha darshan, as well as for sun worship, every day at sunrise. Jehangir also used it as jharokha, as is faithfully shown in his painting made in 1620. He also instituted his 'Adl-i-Janjir'(the chain of justice) on its south side. Owing to its octagonal plan, it was called 'Muthamman Burj'. It has also been mentioned as 'Shah-Burj'(the imperial or king's tower) by Persian historians and foreign travellers. Its name jasmine tower or 'Samman-Burj' as recorded by the contemporary historian Lahauri is a misnomer. It was rebuilt with white marble by Shah Jehan around 1632–1640 AD. He also used it for jharokha darshan which was an indispensable a Mughal institution as was 'Durbar'. It is an octagonal building, five external sides of which make a dalan overlooking the river. Each side has pillar and bracket openings, the easternmost side projects forward and accommodates a jharokha majestically. On the western side of this palace is a spacious dalan with Shah-Nasin (alcoves). A shallow water-basin (kunda) is sunk in its pavement. It is profusely inlaid. This dalan opens on a court which has a chabutara projected by a jali screen, on its northern side, a series of rooms leading to Shish Mahal on its western side; and a colonnade (dalan) with a room attached to its on the southern side. It is, thus, a large complex entirely built of white marble. It has deep niches on the walls, to break the monotony. Dados have repetitive stylized creepers inlaid on borders and carved plants on the centre pillars, brackets and lintels also bear exquisitely inlaid designs and it is one of the most ornamented buildings of Shah Jehan. This palace is directly connected to the Diwan-i-Khas, Shish Mahal, Khas Mahal, and other palaces. and it was from here that the Mughal emperor governed the whole country. This burj offers full and majestic view of Taj Mahal and Shah Jehan spent eight years (1658–1666 AD) of his imprisonment in this complex, and it is said that he died here. His body was taken by boat to the Taj Mahal and buried.
Shish Mahal (1631–40 AD): it was built by Mughal Emperor Shahjahan as a part of summer palace. Its most distinctive feature is glass mosaic work done on its walls and ceiling. These glass pieces have high mirror quality which glittered and twinkled in thousand ways in semi-dark interior. The glass was imported from Haleb of Syria. Shahjahan built glass palace also at Lahore and Delhi.
In popular culture[edit]
The Agra Fort won the Aga Khan Award for Architecture in 2004. India Post issued a stamp to commemorate this event.
The Agra Fort plays a key role in the Sherlock Holmes mystery The Sign of the Four, by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
The Agra Fort was featured in the music video for Habibi Dah, a hit song of Egyptian pop star Hisham Abbas.
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj came to Agra in 1666 as per the "Treaty of Purandar (1665)" entered into with Jai Singh I to meet Aurangzeb in the Diwan-i-Khas. In the audience, he was deliberately placed behind men of lower rank. Insulted, he stormed out of the imperial audience and was confined to Jai Singh's quarters on 12 May 1666.
Gallery[edit]
Plan of Agra Fort on display at the fort, 2012
Exterior of Diwan-i-Am or Hall of Public Audience
Interior of Diwan I Am (Hall of Public Audience)
Persian Calligraphy in Agra Fort
Agra Fort Diwan I Am (Hall of Public Audience)
Amar Singh Gate, Agra
Jahangir Palace
Diwan-i-Khas
Delhi gate, by Seeta Ram, 1814–15
Agra Fort insides
Decorated column
Decorations on the ceiling
Weeks Edwin Gate of the Fortress at Agra India
Inside the Fort's extensive compound
Rampart of Agra Fort
Bathtub of Jahangir
Taj Mahal and Yamuna river
Musamman Burj inside
Anguri Bagh, the garden in the courtyard
Agra Fort: Shish Mahal
Agra Fort: Hon'ble John Russell Colvin's Tomb
Persian calligraphy in Agra Fort

Look for Anguri Bagh on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Anguri Bagh in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Anguri Bagh" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Dayalbagh or Dayal Bagh means 'Garden' (bagh) of 'Merciful' (dayal), inferring "Garden of the Merciful", is a locality in metropolitan Agra in western Uttar Pradesh, India. It is the headquarters of the Dayalbagh subsect of the Radha Soami sect[1][2] where the 8th revered leader lives and presides over the satsang.
It is a self-sustained colony, where its inhabitants lead an active, disciplined and co-operative community life, conforming to the spiritual ideals of their faith. It has affiliated educational institutes such as the Dayalbagh Educational Institute affiliated to Dayalbagh University (deemed). Radhasoami Satsang Sabha is the chief working committee of Radhasoami Faith Dayalbagh.
Demographics[edit]
As of the 2001 India census,[3] Dayalbagh had a population of 3324. Males constitute 51% of the population and females 49%. In Dayalbagh, 8% of the population is under six years of age.
History[edit]
The colony of Dayalbagh was founded on the Basant Day (translation: first day of spring) on 20 January 1915 by Sir Anand Swarup (Huzur Sahab Ji Maharaj), the Fifth Revered Leader of Radha Soami sect, as an ashram or a spiritual home for the followers of the faith, by planting a mulberry tree. The colony was built by the voluntary contribution (by money as well as labor) of the early residents, who considered it as Sewa (social service). The fields near Yamuna river were also acquired by Dayalbagh and as a daily practice, residents and devotees coming from outside leveled the uneven landmass and irrigated it, making it a fertile land from the barren desert. Today also, the devotees give their voluntary contribution everyday in agricultural activities in the fields.
Community life[edit]
The colony is laid out in an open garden setting. The land where the colony was established once consisted of sand dunes. For more than 60 years residents of the colony - men and women, young and old - have worked with quiet dedication in a vast programme for reclamation of land launched in 1943 by Huzur Mehtaji Maharaj, the sixth Revered Leader of the Faith. The result is a lush green 1,200-acre (4.9 km2) farm where food-grains, oil-seeds, fodder, and vegetables are grown.
Shrubs are planted around houses, as part of the environmental protection movement
No individual owns property in Dayalbagh, as the land, houses and institutions belong to the community. People live and work as a community. For example, the residents share various responsibilities like cleaning up the colony and arranging night security. The colony has its own water supply, electricity distribution, and civic services. The colony's dairy provides most of the milk that is needed, and a community kitchen that supplies food at a very nominal cost (no-profit, no-loss basis) to pilgrims. The residents can also obtain meals from there and free themselves from household chores.[4]
A typical house in the residential streets of Dayalbagh.
Soami bagh[edit]
Soami bagh is an area adjacent to Dayalbagh. The land was purchased by Soami Ji Maharaj. Soami Ji's Samadhi [place of achieving Nirvana] has been under construction since building began in 1905 by Guru Maharaj Saheb, and continues till today.[5][6]
The construction involves magnificent piece of art work. A variety of fruits, vegetables and flowers are carved out on walls and pillars on Marble stone.
Health care[edit]
There is a hospital called as "Saran Ashram Hospital" with a maternity ward. Facilities exist for ophthalmic and dental treatment, ultrasound, ECG, and pathological and X-Ray testing. All consultations and treatment are free for everyone. The majority of patients are from outside Dayalbagh. There are also homeopathic and ayurvedic dispensaries.
Peacocks are common in the residential areas of Dayalbagh
The day in Dayalbagh begins with congregational prayers, followed by physical fitness exercise and work on the farms and in colony by way of service, where after people go to their respective vocations. The day ends with prayers in the evening.
Industries[edit]
Small-scale industries known as the Model Industries were established in 1916 to provide employment and a source of livelihood to the persons residing in the colony. It has done some pioneering work in the country. The industries have now been decentralized and cottage scale production of goods of daily necessity is taking place in units set up by Satsangis all over the country.
The Radhasoami Urban Cooperative Bank and the Dayalbagh Mahila Bank cater to the financial requirements of various organizations and individuals in the colony. The Dayalbagh Printing Press prints Holy Books and the two Satsang weeklies, one in English (also available in its e-version) and the other in Hindi.
Dayalbagh Educational Institute[edit]
The foundation of a school was laid after 2 years of the foundation of the colony in 1917. The school has grown in course of time to become a Deemed University-Dayalbagh Educational Institute-with various faculties with facilities for research. In 1981 the Ministry of Education, Government of India, conferred the status of an institution deemed to be a University on the Dayalbagh Educational Institute, to implement the new program of undergraduate studies. Prof. M. B. Lal Sahab, a former Vice Chancellor of the Lucknow University, founded this institution and was also the first director of DEI The education system followed is unique and provides value-based multi-disciplinary education with work experience. In addition, the colony has a diploma level Technical College, a Women's Polytechnic, a nursery, primary level schools and secondary level colleges for boys and girls; a school of Languages; a School of Art and Culture; a Tailoring School; a School of Dress Designing and Interior Decoration; a Day Boarding School; a Training Center for Indian Music; and a Leather Working School. The campus is situated in Dayalbagh, away from the noise of the city. It is situated at a distance of about two Km. from the city of Agra on its northern periphery. It is conveniently connected to the railway stations and bus-stands by the city bus, rickshaws, auto-rickshaws and taxi(s).
The institute gained national attention[7][8] when Neha Sharma, a PhD. scholar was found murdered[9] in the nano-biotechnology lab.[9] Students of the Dayalbagh Educational Institute protested on the streets of Agra to demand justice.[10][11]
Other colonies in Dayalbagh suburb of Agra[edit]
New residential colonies have developed around Dayalbagh, such as Tagore Nagar, Adan Bagh, Sarla Bagh, Heera Bagh, Mehar Bagh, Kabir Nagar , Saraswati Puram, Punjabi Bagh Pushpanjali etc. The residents of these new colonies follow religions and faiths of their choice and not necessarily Radha Soami faith. This area is also called New Agra where many people have settled down around 100 ft Road.

Look for Diwan-i-Am Agra Fort on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Diwan-i-Am Agra Fort in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Diwan-i-Am Agra Fort" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Jahangir Mahal, Orchha" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Jahangir Mahal
Type Palace
Etymology Jahangir
Location Orchha, Madhya Pradesh
Built 17th century CE
Jahangir Mahal, Citadel of Jahangir, Orchha Palace, Mahal-e-Jahangir Orchha, Jahangir Citadel is a citadel and garrison located in Orchha, Madhya Pradesh, India.[1][2]
History[edit]
The establishment of the Jahangir Mahal dates back to the 17th century C E when the ruler of the region Vir Singh Deo built the structure as a symbol of warm reception of the Mughal Emperor Jahangir, during the latter’s first visit to the city. The entrance of the palace is marked by an artistic and traditional gateway. The front wall of the structure faces to the east and is covered with turquoise tiles. Jahangir Mahal is a three-storied structure that is marked by stylishly hanging balconies, porches, and apartments.[3]
The domes of the Jahangir Mahal, were built according to Timurid customs; its grand Iwans are large enough to accommodate the entry of war elephants, and its high position over the landscape allowed cannons superior range.

For a list of mosques named "Jama masjid", "Jameh mosque", "Great mosque", etc, see List of grand mosques.
The Jameh Mosque in Isfahan, Iran, a historical congregational mosque originally founded in the eighth century
A congregational mosque or Friday mosque (Arabic: مَسْجِد جَامِع, masjid jāmi‘, or simply: جَامِع, jāmi‘; Turkish: Cami), or sometimes great mosque or grand mosque (Arabic: جامع كبير, jāmi‘ kabir; Turkish: Ulu Cami), is a mosque for hosting the Friday noon prayers known as jumu'ah.[1] It can also host the Eid prayers in situations when there is no musalla or eidgah available nearby to host the prayers. In early Islamic history, the number of congregational mosques in one city was strictly limited. As cities and populations grew over time, it became more common for many mosques to host Friday prayers in the same area.[2][3]
Etymology[edit]
The full Arabic term for this kind of mosque is masjid jāmi‘ (مَسْجِد جَامِع), which is typically translated as "mosque of congregation" or "congregational mosque".[2] "Congregational" is used to translate jāmi‘ (جَامِع), which comes from the Arabic root "ج - م - ع" which has a meaning ‘to bring together’ or ‘to unify’ (verbal form: جمع and يجمع).[4][2] In Arabic, the term is typically simplified to just jāmi‘ (جَامِع). Similarly, in Turkish the term cami (Turkish pronunciation: [d͡ʒami]) is used for the same purpose.[5] As the distinction between a "congregational mosque" and other mosques has diminished in more recent history, the Arabic terms masjid and jami' have become more interchangeable.[6][7]
In non-Arab Muslim nations, the word jāmi‘ ("that which gathers, congregates or assembles") is often conflated with another word from the same root, jumu‘ah (Arabic: جُمُعَة, lit. 'assembly, gathering'), a term which refers to the Friday noon prayers (Arabic: صَلَاة الْجُمُعَة, romanized: ṣalāṫ al-jumu‘ah, lit. 'prayer of assembly') or the Friday itself (Arabic: يَوْم الْجُمُعَة, romanized: yawm al-jumu‘ah, lit. 'day of assembly').[8]
History[edit]
Mosque of Amr ibn al-As, founded in the seventh century as the first congregational mosque of Fustat, Egypt
Since the early periods of Islam, a functional distinction existed between large central mosques built and controlled by the state versus small local mosques built and maintained by the general population.[9] In the early years of Islam, under the Rashidun caliphs and many of the Umayyad caliphs, each city generally had only one congregational mosque where Friday prayers were held, while smaller mosques for regular prayers were built in local neighbourhoods. In fact, in some parts of the Islamic world such as in Egypt, Friday services were initially not permitted in villages and in other areas outside the main city where the congregational mosque stood.[10] The ruler or governor of the city usually built his residence (the dar al-imara) next to the congregational mosque, and in this early period the ruler also delivered the khutbah (Friday sermon) during Friday prayers.[9][11] This practice was inherited from the example of Muhammad and was passed on the caliphs after him. In the provinces, the local governors who ruled on behalf of the caliph were expected to deliver the khutbah for their local community.[11] The minbar, a kind of pulpit from which the khutbah was traditionally given, also became a standard feature of congregational mosques by the early Abbasid period (late eighth century).[12][13]
The mihrab area of the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus today, with the minbar to the right
In later centuries, as the Islamic world became increasingly divided between different political states, as the Muslim population and the cities grew, and as new rulers wished to leave their mark of patronage, it became common to have multiple congregational mosques in the same city.[9][10] For example, Fustat, the predecessor of modern Cairo, was founded in the seventh century with just one congregational mosque (the Mosque of Amr ibn al-As). However, by the 15th century, under the Mamluks, the urban agglomeration of Cairo and Fustat had 130 congregational mosques.[9] In fact, the city became so saturated with congregational mosques that by the late 15th century its rulers could rarely build new ones.[14] A similar proliferation of congregational mosques occurred in the cities of Syria, Iraq, Iran, and Morocco, as well as in the newly conquered Constantinople (Istanbul) under Ottoman rule.[9]
Architecture and function[edit]
Congregational mosques function as a community space.[15] As a community space, it allows for prayer and social engagement.[16] Congregational mosques have a crucial role in communities Islamic practices.[15] The Qur'an does not state architectural parameters for a congregational mosque, and as a result there are both differences and similarities between congregational mosques of different regions.[17][page needed] As all male members of the community are expected to attend Friday prayers,[1] congregational mosques must be large enough to accommodate them and their size thus varies from community to community. The Qur'an does highlight that the prayer hall has to accommodate the population of the community.[18][page needed] Almost all congregational mosques feature a minbar, which is an elevated platform where the Friday sermon is given. The minbar is usually places near the qibla wall (the wall standing in the direction of prayer) and the mihrab.[12][13]

Look for Jawab Masjid on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Jawab Masjid in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Jawab Masjid" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Kalakriti Cultural & Convention Center on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Kalakriti Cultural & Convention Center in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Kalakriti Cultural & Convention Center" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Mehtab Bagh
View towards the Taj Mahal from Mehtab Bagh
Location of Mehtab Bagh
Type Garden
Location Agra, Uttar Pradesh
Coordinates 27°10′47″N 78°02′31″E
Area 25 acres (10 ha)
Created 1652
Operated by ASI
Open Year round
Status Open
Mehtab Bagh (lit. 'Moonlight Garden') is a charbagh complex in Agra, North India. It lies north of the Taj Mahal complex and the Agra Fort on the opposite side of the Yamuna River, in the flood plains.[1][2] The garden complex, square in shape, measures about 300 by 300 metres (980 ft × 980 ft) and is perfectly aligned with the Taj Mahal on the opposite bank.[3] During the rainy season, the ground becomes partially flooded.[4]
History[edit]
Watercolour drawing with bird's eye view of the Taj complex with the Mehtab Bagh at the top across the river Yamuna (18th century)
The Mehtab Bagh garden was the last of eleven Mughal-built gardens along the Yamuna opposite the Taj Mahal and the Agra Fort.[2] The garden was built by Emperor Babur (d. 1530).[5] It is also noted that Emperor Shah Jahan had identified a site from the crescent-shaped, grass-covered floodplain across the Yamuna River as an ideal location for viewing the Taj Mahal. It was then created as "a moonlit pleasure garden called Mehtab Bagh." White plaster walkways, airy pavilions, pools and fountains were also created as part of the garden, with fruit trees and narcissus.[6] The garden was designed as an integral part of the Taj Mahal complex in the riverfront terrace pattern. Its width was identical to that of the rest of the Taj Mahal.[2] Legends attributed to the travelogue of the 17th century French traveler Jean Baptiste Tavernier mention Shah Jahan's wish to build a Black Taj Mahal for himself, as a twin to the Taj Mahal; however, this could not be achieved as he was imprisoned by his son Aurangzeb. This myth had been further fueled in 1871 by a British archaeologist, A. C. L. Carlleyle, who, while discovering the remnants of an old pond at the site had mistaken it for the foundation of the fabled structure.[2] Thus, Carlleyle became the first researcher to notice structural remains at the site, albeit blackened by moss and lichen.[4] Mehtab Bagh was later owned by Raja Man Singh Kacchawa of Amber, who also owned the land around the Taj Mahal.[7]
Frequent floods and villagers extracting building materials nearly ruined the garden. Remaining structures within the garden were in a ruinous state. By the 1990s, the garden's existence was almost forgotten and it had degraded to little more than an enormous mound of sand, covered with wild vegetation and alluvial silt.[4][8]
Site plan[edit]
Plan of the Taj Mahal complex with the Mehtab Bagh gardens to the left
Remaining southeastern red sandstone corner tower of the enclosure at the river bank
Remains of the octagonal reflecting pool towards the river bank
Inscriptions on the site of Mehtab Bagh mention that it adjoins other gardens to the west; these are called "Chahar Bagh Padshahi" and "Second Chahar Bagh Padshahi".[9] A compound wall surrounded the garden; it was made of brick, lime plaster, and red sandstone cladding. Measuring about 289 metres (948 ft) in length, the river wall is partially intact. Built on platforms, there were domed towers of red sandstone in an octagonal shape, which may have stood at the corners. A 2–2.5 metres (6 ft 7 in – 8 ft 2 in) wide pathway made of brick edged the western boundary of the grounds, covering the remains of the boundary wall to the west.[4] Near the entrance is a small Dalit shrine on the riverside.[10] Of the four sandstone towers, which marked the corners of the garden, only the one on the southeast remains. A large octagonal pond on the southern periphery reflects the image of the Mausoleum.[2] There is a small central tank on the eastern side. Water channels enrich the landscape and there are baradaris on the east and west. There is a gate at the northern wall.[2][3] The foundations of two structures remain immediately north and south of the large pond, which were probably garden pavilions. From the northern structure a stepped waterfall would have fed the pool. The garden to the north has the typical square, cross-axial plan with a square pool in its centre. To the west, an aqueduct fed the garden.[11] Other structures which are not in keeping with the original landscape plan include nurseries owned by private individuals, a temple in place of a gazebo, a statue of B. R. Ambedkar holding the Constitution of India in the courtyard, and relics of a water supply network to the park.[2]
Restoration[edit]
Restoration of the Mehtab Bagh began after the ASI survey, setting new standards for Mughal garden research. This included a surface survey, historical documentation, paleobotanical assessment, archaeological excavation techniques, and requirements coordination with the Ministries of Culture, Tourism, and Planning.[12] Restoration began in the 1990s, aided by the Americans, during which barbed-wire fencing was added to the Mehtab Bagh site.[13] The garden's original ambiance was restored as ASI insisted on having plants that the Mughals had used in their gardens. Though the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) had suggested planting of 25 pollution-mitigating plant species every 2 metres (6 ft 7 in)[2] in the proposed renovation of the garden, this was opposed by the ASI. The Supreme Court intervened in the matter in favour of ASI who wanted the garden to only have plants that the Mughals used in their gardens.
A common list of plants was suggested. ASI landscape artists meticulously planned the replanting of trees, plants and herbage to match the original Mughal gardens, replicating the riverside gardens brought to India from Central Asia in Shalimar Bagh in Kashmir. Some 81 plants adopted in Mughal horticulture were planted, including guava, maulshri, Nerium, hibiscus, citrus fruit plants, neem, bauhinia, ashoka and jamun. The herbage was planted in such a way that tall trees follow the short ones, then shrubs, and lastly flowering plants. Some of these plants produce bright-coloured flowers that shine in the moonlight. The park has been reconstructed to its original grandeur and has now become a very good location to view the Taj Mahal.[2][5]
Archaeology[edit]
Archaeological excavations in the Mehtab Bagh site have been described as "setting new archaeological standards for Mughal garden research", using paleobotanical and excavations techniques.[12] Excavations to the extent of 90,000 cubic metres of earth, were carried out by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), in 1994. The excavations unearthed a large octagonal tank with 25 fountains, and a garden, divided into four compartments. Mumtaz Mahal's tomb was found to be situated halfway between the Taj Mahal complex's main entrance and the ends of the Mehtab Bagh site.[2] This is corroborated by a letter from Aurangzeb addressed to Shah Jahan in which he referred to the condition of the garden after the flood event in 1652 AD.
Black Taj Mahal[edit]
Main article: Black Taj Mahal
The Black Taj Mahal is a legendary black marble mausoleum that is said to have been planned to be built across the Yamuna River opposite the Taj Mahal in Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India. Mughal emperor Shah Jahan is said to have desired a mausoleum for himself exactly to that of the one he had built in memory of his second wife, Mumtaz Mahal. but built entirely out of Black Marble. [14][unreliable source?]. But Shah Jahan was not able to complete it as he was put under house arrest by his son Aurangzeb in the Agra Fort. Shah Jahan died in 1666 and his son, Aurangzeb planned to bury his father's body in the Taj Mahal next to Shah Jahan's wife, Mumtaz Mahal. The site for the Black Taj Mahal was converted into the Mehtab Bagh.

Look for Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Sheesh Mahal (transl. Palace of Mirrors) may refer to:
Architecture[edit]
Sheesh Mahal, Amer Fort, in Amer, Rajasthan, India
Sheesh Mahal (Lahore Fort), in Lahore, Punjab Pakistan
Sheesh Mahal, at Patiala, Punjab, India
Sheesh Mahal, in the Orchha Fort complex, Orchha, Madhya Pradesh, India
Sheesh Mahal in Agra Fort, Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India
Other uses[edit]
Sheesh Mahal (1950 film), 1950 Indian film
Sheesh Mahal Cricket Tournament, domestic cricket competition in India

For other uses, see Taj Mahal (disambiguation).
Taj Mahal
Location Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India
Coordinates 27°10′30″N 78°02′31″E
Area 17 hectares (42 acres)[1]
Height 73 m (240 ft)
Built 1631–1653[2]
Built for Mumtaz Mahal
Architect Ustad Ahmad Lahori
Architectural style(s) Mughal architecture
Visitors 4.8 million[3] (in 2023)
Governing body Ministry of Culture, Government of India
Website tajmahal.gov.in
Location of Taj Mahal in Uttar Pradesh, India
Show map of Uttar Pradesh
Show map of India
Show all
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Criteria Cultural: i
Reference 252
Inscription 1983 (7th Session)
The Taj Mahal (/ˌtɑːdʒ məˈhɑːl, ˌtɑːʒ-/; lit. 'Crown of the Palace')[4][5][6] is an ivory-white marble mausoleum on the right bank of the river Yamuna in Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India. It was commissioned in 1631 by the fifth Mughal emperor, Shah Jahan (r. 1628–1658) to house the tomb of his beloved wife, Mumtaz Mahal; it also houses the tomb of Shah Jahan himself. The tomb is the centrepiece of a 17-hectare (42-acre) complex, which includes a mosque and a guest house, and is set in formal gardens bounded on three sides by a crenellated wall.
Construction of the mausoleum was essentially completed in 1643, but work continued on other phases of the project for another 10 years. The first ceremony held at the mausoleum was an observance by Shah Jahan, on 6 February 1643, of the 12th anniversary of the death of Mumtaz Mahal. The mausoleum was opened at that time to thousands of mourners.[7][a]
The Taj Mahal complex is believed to have been completed in its entirety in 1653 at a cost estimated at the time to be around ₹32 million, which in 2023 would be approximately ₹35 billion (US$498 million).[8] The construction project employed some 20,000 artisans under the guidance of a board of architects led by Ustad Ahmad Lahori, the emperor's court architect. Various types of symbolism have been employed in the Taj to reflect natural beauty and divinity.
The Taj Mahal was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1983 for being "the jewel of Islamic art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage". It is regarded by many as the best example of Mughal architecture and a symbol of India's rich history. The Taj Mahal attracts around 5 million visitors a year,[3]and in 2007 it was declared a winner of the New 7 Wonders of the World (2000–2007) initiative.
Etymology
"Taj Mahal" is believed to be derived from the Persian and Arabian words meaning "crown" and "palace".
Abdul Hamid Lahori, in his book from 1636 Padshahnama, refers to the Taj Mahal as rauza-i munawwara (Perso-Arabic: روضه منواره, rawdah-i munawwarah), meaning the illumined or illustrious tomb.[9] The current name for the Taj Mahal is of Urdu origin, and believed to be derived from Arabic and Persian, with the words tāj mahall meaning "crown" (tāj) "palace" (mahall).[10][11][4] The name "Taj" came from the corruption of the second syllable of "Mumtaz".[12][13]
Inspiration
"Shah Jahan on a globe" from the Smithsonian Institution
Artistic depiction of Mumtaz Mahal
The Taj Mahal was commissioned by Shah Jahan in 1631, to be built in the memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal, who died on 17 June that year, while giving birth to their 14th child, Gauhara Begum.[14][15] Construction started in 1632,[16] and the mausoleum was completed in 1648, while the surrounding buildings and garden were finished five years later.[17] The imperial court documenting Shah Jahan's grief after the death of Mumtaz Mahal illustrates the love story held as the inspiration for the Taj Mahal.[18] According to contemporary historians Muhammad Amin Qazvini, Abdul Hamid Lahori and Muhammad Saleh Kamboh, he did not show the same level of affection to others as he had shown her while she was alive. He avoided royal affairs for a week due to his grief, along with giving up listening to music and dressing lavishly for two years. Shah Jahan was enamored by the beauty of the land at the south side of Agra on which a mansion belonging to Raja Jai Singh I stood. This place was chosen for the construction of Mumtaz's tomb by Shah Jahan and Jai Singh agreed to donate it to the emperor.[19]
Architecture and design
Main article: Origins and architecture of the Taj Mahal
The Taj Mahal incorporates and expands on design traditions of Indo-Islamic and earlier Mughal architecture. Specific inspiration came from successful Timurid and Mughal buildings including the Gur-e Amir (the tomb of Timur, progenitor of the Mughal dynasty, in Samarkand),[20] Humayun's Tomb which inspired the Charbagh gardens and hasht-behesht (architecture) plan of the site, Itmad-Ud-Daulah's Tomb (sometimes called the Baby Taj), and Shah Jahan's own Jama Masjid in Delhi. While earlier Mughal buildings were primarily constructed of red sandstone, Shah Jahan promoted the use of white marble inlaid with semi-precious stones. Buildings under his patronage reached new levels of refinement.[21]
Tomb
The false sarcophagi of Mumtaz Mahal (right) and Shah Jahan (left) in the main chamber
The actual tombs of Mumtaz Mahal (right) and Shah Jahan (left) in the lower level
The tomb is the central focus of the entire complex of the Taj Mahal. It is a sizable, white marble structure standing on a square plinth and consists of a symmetrical building with an iwan (an arch-shaped doorway) topped by a large dome and finial. Like most Mughal tombs, the basic elements are Indo-Islamic in origin.[22]
The base structure is a large multi-chambered cube with chamfered corners forming an unequal eight-sided structure that is approximately 55 metres (180 ft) on each of the four long sides. Each side of the iwan is framed with a huge pishtaq or vaulted archway with two similarly shaped arched balconies stacked on either side. This motif of stacked pishtaqs is replicated on the chamfered corner areas, making the design completely symmetrical on all sides of the building. Four minarets frame the tomb, one at each corner of the plinth facing the chamfered corners. The main chamber houses the false sarcophagi of Mumtaz Mahal and Shah Jahan; the actual graves are at a lower level.[23]
The marble onion dome of the Taj Mahal, its most spectacular feature
The most spectacular feature is the marble dome that surmounts the tomb. The dome is nearly 35 metres (115 ft) high which is close in measurement to the length of the base, and accentuated by the cylindrical "drum" it sits on, which is approximately 7 metres (23 ft) high. Because of its shape, the dome is often called an onion dome or amrud (guava dome).[24] The top is decorated with a lotus design which also serves to accentuate its height. The shape of the dome is emphasised by four smaller domed chattris (kiosks) placed at its corners, which replicate the onion shape of the main dome. The dome is slightly asymmetrical.[25] Their columned bases open through the roof of the tomb and provide light to the interior. Tall decorative spires (guldastas) extend from edges of base walls, and provide visual emphasis to the height of the dome. The lotus motif is repeated on both the chattris and guldastas. The dome and chattris are topped by a gilded finial which mixes traditional Persian and Hindustani decorative elements.[26]
The main finial was originally made of gold but was replaced by a copy made of gilded bronze in the early 19th century. This feature provides a clear example of integration of traditional Persian and Hindu decorative elements.[27] The finial is topped by a moon, a typical Islamic motif whose horns point heavenward.[28]
The 40 metres (130 ft) minarets were used by the muezzin to call the believers to prayer
The minarets, which are each more than 40 metres (130 ft) tall, display the designer's penchant for symmetry. They were designed as working minarets – a traditional element of mosques, used by the muezzin to call the Islamic faithful to prayer. Each minaret is effectively divided into three equal parts by two working balconies that ring the tower. At the top of the tower is a final balcony surmounted by a chattri that mirrors the design of those on the tomb. The chattris all share the same decorative elements of a lotus design topped by a gilded finial. The minarets were constructed slightly outside of the plinth so that in the event of collapse, a typical occurrence with many tall constructions of the period, the material from the towers would tend to fall away from the tomb.[29]
Exterior decorations
The exterior decorations of the Taj Mahal are among the finest in Mughal architecture. As the surface area changes, the decorations are refined proportionally. The decorative elements were created by applying paint, stucco, stone inlays or carvings. In line with the Islamic prohibition against the use of anthropomorphic forms, the decorative elements can be grouped into either calligraphy, abstract forms or vegetative motifs. Throughout the complex are passages from the Qur'an that comprise some of the decorative elements. Recent scholarship suggests that Amanat Khan chose the passages.[30][31]
The calligraphy on the Great Gate reads "O Soul, thou art at rest. Return to the Lord at peace with Him, and He at peace with you."[31] The calligraphy was created in 1609 by a calligrapher named Abdul Haq. Shah Jahan conferred the title of "Amanat Khan" upon him as a reward for his "dazzling virtuosity".[32] Near the lines from the Qur'an at the base of the interior dome is the inscription, "Written by the insignificant being, Amanat Khan Shirazi".[33] Much of the calligraphy is composed of florid thuluth script made of jasper or black marble[32] inlaid in white marble panels. Higher panels are written in slightly larger script to reduce the skewing effect when viewed from below. The calligraphy found on the marble cenotaphs in the tomb is particularly detailed and delicate.[34]
Abstract forms are used throughout, especially in the plinth, minarets, gateway, mosque, jawab and, to a lesser extent, on the surfaces of the tomb. The domes and vaults of the sandstone buildings are worked with tracery of incised painting to create elaborate geometric forms. Herringbone inlays define the space between many of the adjoining elements. White inlays are used in sandstone buildings, and dark or black inlays on the white marbles. Mortared areas of the marble buildings have been stained or painted in a contrasting colour which creates a complex [35] array of geometric patterns. Floors and walkways use contrasting tiles or blocks in tessellation patterns.[36]
On the lower walls of the tomb are white marble dados sculpted with realistic bas relief depictions of flowers and vines. The marble has been polished to emphasise the exquisite detailing of the carvings. The dado frames and archway spandrels have been decorated with pietra dura inlays of highly stylised, almost geometric vines, flowers and fruits. The inlay stones are of yellow marble, jasper and jade, polished and levelled to the surface of the walls.[32]
Taj Mahal exterior with a minaret
Arabic calligraphy at the tomb entrance
Detail of plant motifs on Taj Mahal wall
Finial, tamga of the Mughal Empire with the word "Allah" written on it in Arabic
Interior decoration
The interior chamber of the Taj Mahal reaches far beyond traditional decorative elements. The inlay work is not pietra dura, but a lapidary of precious and semiprecious gemstones.[37] The inner chamber is an octagon with the design allowing for entry from each face, although only the door facing the garden to the south is used. The interior walls are about 25 metres (82 ft) high and are topped by a "false" interior dome decorated with a sun motif. Eight pishtaq arches define the space at ground level and, as with the exterior, each lower pishtaq is crowned by a second pishtaq about midway up the wall.[38] The four central upper arches form balconies or viewing areas, and each balcony's exterior window has an intricate screen or jali a grill lattice cut from marble. In addition to the light from the balcony screens, light enters through roof openings covered by chattris at the corners. The octagonal marble screen or jali bordering the cenotaphs is made from eight marble panels carved through with intricate pierce work. The remaining surfaces are inlaid in delicate detail with semi-precious stones forming twining vines, fruits and flowers. Each chamber wall is highly decorated with dado bas-relief, intricate lapidary inlay and refined calligraphy panels which reflect, in little detail, the design elements seen throughout the exterior of the complex.[39]
Muslim tradition forbids elaborate decoration of graves. Hence, the bodies of Mumtaz and Shah Jahan were put in a relatively plain crypt beneath the inner chamber with their faces turned right, towards Mecca. Mumtaz Mahal's cenotaph is placed at the precise centre of the inner chamber on a rectangular marble base of 1.5 by 2.5 metres (4 ft 11 in by 8 ft 2 in). Both the base and casket are elaborately inlaid with precious and semiprecious gems. Calligraphic inscriptions on the casket identify and praise Mumtaz. On the lid of the casket is a raised rectangular lozenge meant to suggest a writing tablet. Shah Jahan's cenotaph is beside Mumtaz's to the western side and is the only visible asymmetric element in the entire complex. His cenotaph is bigger than his wife's, but reflects the same elements: a larger casket on a slightly taller base precisely decorated with lapidary and calligraphy that identifies him. On the lid of the casket is a traditional sculpture of a small pen box.[38]
The pen box and writing tablet are traditional Mughal funerary icons decorating the caskets of men and women respectively. The Ninety Nine Names of God are calligraphic inscriptions on the sides of the actual tomb of Mumtaz Mahal. Other inscriptions inside the crypt include: O Noble, O Magnificent, O Majestic, O Unique, O Eternal, O Glorious... . The Tomb of Shah Jahan bears a calligraphic inscription that reads: He travelled from this world to the banquet-hall of Eternity on the night of the twenty-sixth of the month of Rajab, in the year 1076 Hijri.[40]
Top-down view of the cenotaphs inside the Taj Mahal
Screen surrounding the cenotaphs, openwork marble inlaid with precious stones
Detail of motifs on the cenotaphs' screen
Pietra dura, or parchin kari, flowers decoration
Garden
Walkways beside reflecting pool
The complex is set around a large 300-metre (980 ft) square charbagh or Mughal garden. The garden uses raised pathways that divide each of the four-quarters of the garden into 16 sunken parterres or flowerbeds. Halfway between the tomb and gateway in the centre of the garden is a raised marble water tank with a reflecting pool positioned on a north–south axis to reflect the image of the mausoleum. The elevated marble water tank is called al Hawd al-Kawthar in reference to the "Tank of Abundance" promised to Muhammad.[41]
Elsewhere, the garden is laid out with avenues of trees labelled according to common and scientific names[42] and fountains. The charbagh garden, a design inspired by Persian gardens, was introduced to India by Babur, the first Mughal emperor. It symbolises the four flowing rivers of Jannah (Paradise) and reflects the Paradise garden derived from the Persian paridaeza, meaning 'walled garden.' In mystic Islamic texts of the Mughal period, Paradise is described as an ideal garden of abundance with four rivers flowing from a central spring or mountain, separating the garden into north, west, south and east.[43]
Most Mughal charbaghs are rectangular with a tomb or pavilion in the centre. The Taj Mahal garden is unusual in that the main element, the tomb, is located at the end of the garden. With the discovery of Mahtab Bagh or "Moonlight Garden" on the other side of the Yamuna, the interpretation of the Archaeological Survey of India is that the Yamuna river itself was incorporated into the garden's design and was meant to be seen as one of the rivers of Paradise.[44] Similarities in layout and architectural features with the Shalimar Gardens suggests both gardens may have been designed by the same architect, Ali Mardan.[45] Early accounts of the garden describe its profusion of vegetation, including abundant roses, daffodils, and fruit trees.[46] As the Mughal Empire declined, the Taj Mahal and its gardens also declined. By the 19th century, the British Empire controlled more than three-fifths of India,[47] and assumed management of the Taj Mahal. They changed the landscaping to their liking which more closely resembled the formal lawns of London.[48]
Outlying buildings
The main gateway (darwaza) to the Taj Mahal
The western building, a mosque, faces the tomb.
The Taj Mahal complex is enclosed by crenellated red sandstone walls on three sides, with the river-facing side left open. Beyond these walls lie additional mausoleums, including those of Shah Jahan's other wives, and a larger tomb for Mumtaz's favorite servant. The inner sides of the walls feature columned arcades typical of Hindu temples, adorned with domed chattris and small structures like the Music House. The main gateway, primarily built of marble, mirrors the tomb's architecture and incorporates intricate decorations like bas-relief and pietra dura inlays. At the far end of the complex stand two grand red sandstone buildings—a mosque and a jawab—thought to provide architectural balance. The mosque's design resembles others built by Shah Jahan, while the jawab lacks a mihrab and features floors with geometric designs. These outlying buildings were completed in 1643.[17]
The Taj Mahal and outlying buildings as seen from across the Yamuna River (northern view)
Construction
Animation showing the Taj Mahal (English subtitles)
The Taj Mahal is situated to the south of the walled city of Agra. Shah Jahan presented Maharaja Jai Singh I with a large palace in the centre of Agra in exchange for the land.[49] An area of roughly 1.2 hectares (3 acres) was excavated, filled with dirt to reduce seepage, and levelled at 50 metres (160 ft) above the riverbank level. In the tomb area, piles were dug and filled with stone and rubble to form the footings of the tomb. Instead of lashed bamboo, workmen constructed a colossal brick scaffold that mirrored the tomb. The scaffold was so enormous that foremen expected it to take years to dismantle.[50]
The Taj Mahal was constructed using materials from all over India and Asia. It is believed over 1,000 elephants were used to transport building materials. Some 22,000 labourers, painters, embroidery artists and stonecutters were used.[51] The translucent white marble was brought from Makrana, Rajasthan, the jasper from the Punjab region, jade and crystal from China. The turquoise was from Tibet and the Lapis lazuli from Afghanistan, while the sapphire came from Sri Lanka and the carnelian from Arabia. In all, 28 types of precious and semi-precious stone were inlaid into the white marble.[52]
According to the legend, Shah Jahan decreed that anyone could keep the bricks taken from the scaffold, and thus it was dismantled by peasants overnight.[53] A 15-kilometre (9.3 mi) tamped-earth ramp was built to transport marble and materials to the construction site and teams of 20 or 30 oxen pulled the blocks on specially constructed wagons.[54] An elaborate post-and-beam pulley system was used to raise the blocks into the desired position. Water was drawn from the river by a series of purs, an animal-powered rope and bucket mechanism, into a large storage tank and raised to a large distribution tank. It was passed into three subsidiary tanks, from which it was piped to the complex.[55]
The plinth and tomb took some 12 years to complete. The remaining parts of the complex took an additional 10 years and were completed in order of minarets, mosque and jawab, and gateway. Since the complex was built in stages, discrepancies exist in completion dates due to differing opinions on "completion". Construction of the mausoleum itself was essentially completed by 1643[16] while work on the outlying buildings continued for years. Estimates of the cost of construction vary due to difficulties in estimating costs across time. The total cost at the time has been estimated to be about ₹ 32 million,[16] which is around ₹ 52.8 billion ($827 million US) based on 2015 values.[56]
Symbolism
Main article: Origins and architecture of the Taj Mahal § Concepts, symbolism and interpretations
The mausoleum at sunset. Light is a Mughal metaphor for God.
Due to the global attention that it has received and the millions of visitors it attracts, the Taj Mahal has become a prominent image that is associated with India, and in this way has become a symbol of India itself.[57]
Along with being a renowned symbol of love, the Taj Mahal is also a symbol of Shah Jahan's wealth and power, and the fact that the empire had prospered under his rule.[58] Bilateral symmetry, dominated by a central axis, has historically been used by rulers as a symbol of a ruling force that brings balance and harmony, and Shah Jahan applied that concept in the making of the Taj Mahal.[59] Additionally, the plan is aligned in the cardinal north–south direction and the corners have been placed so that when seen from the centre of the plan, the sun can be seen rising and setting on the north and south corners on the summer and winter solstices respectively. This makes the Taj a symbolic horizon.[60]
The planning and structure of the Taj Mahal, from the building itself to the gardens and beyond, is symbolic of Mumtaz Mahal's mansion in the garden of Paradise.[59] The concept of Gardens of Paradise is extended into the building of the mausoleum as well. Colorful vines and flowers decorate the interior, and are filled in with semi-precious stones using a technique called pietra dura, or as the Mughals called it, parchin kari.[61] The building appears to slightly change colour depending on the time of day and the weather. The sky has not only been incorporated in the design through the reflecting pools but also through the surface of the building itself. This is another way to imply the presence of Allah at the site.[62]
According to Ebba Koch, art historian and international expert in the understanding and interpretation of Mughal architecture and the Taj Mahal, the planning of the entire compound of the Taj symbolises earthly life and the afterlife, a subset of the symbolisation of the divine. The plan has been split into two – one half is the white marble mausoleum itself and the gardens, and the other half is the red sandstone side meant for worldly markets. Only the mausoleum is white so as to represent the enlightenment, spirituality and faith of Mumtaz Mahal. According to the world-traveler Eleanor Roosevelt, the white symbolised the purity of real love.[63] Koch has deciphered that symbolic of Islamic teachings, the plan of the worldly side is a mirror image of the otherworldly side, and the grand gate in the middle represents the transition between the two worlds.
The Taj is also seen as a feminine architectural form, and is thought to embody Mumtaz Mahal herself.[64]
Later days
Photograph of the Taj Mahal by Samuel Bourne, 1860s
Soon after the Taj Mahal's completion, Shah Jahan was deposed by his son Aurangzeb and put under house arrest at the nearby Agra Fort from where he could see the Taj Mahal. Upon Shah Jahan's death, Aurangzeb buried him in the mausoleum next to his wife.[65] In the 18th century, the Jat rulers of Bharatpur invaded Agra and attacked the Taj Mahal. They took away the two chandeliers, one of agate and another of silver, which were hung over the main cenotaph; they also took the gold and silver screen. Kanbo, a Mughal historian, said the gold shield which covered the 4.6-metre-high (15 ft) finial at the top of the main dome was also removed during the Jat despoilation.[66]
By the late 19th century, parts of the buildings had fallen into disrepair. At the end of the 19th century, British viceroy Lord Curzon ordered a sweeping restoration project, which was completed in 1908.[67] He also commissioned the large lamp in the interior chamber, modelled after one in a Cairo mosque. During this time, the garden was remodelled with European-style lawns that are still in place today.[68]
Threats
Protective wartime scaffolding in 1942
In 1942, the government erected scaffolding to disguise the building in anticipation of air attacks by the Japanese Air Force.[69][70] During the India-Pakistan wars of 1965 and 1971, scaffolding was again erected to mislead bomber pilots.[71]
More recent threats have come from environmental pollution on the banks of the Yamuna River including acid rain[72] due to the Mathura Oil Refinery,[73] which was opposed by Supreme Court of India directives.[74] The pollution has been turning the Taj Mahal yellow-brown.[75][76] To help control the pollution, the Indian government has set up the "Taj Trapezium Zone (TTZ)", a 10,400-square-kilometre (4,000 sq mi) area around the monument where strict emissions standards are in place.[77]
Concerns for the tomb's structural integrity have recently been raised because of a decline in the groundwater level in the Yamuna river basin which is falling at a rate of approximately 1.5 m (5 ft) per year. In 2010, cracks appeared in parts of the tomb, and the minarets surrounding the monument exhibited signs of tilting, possibly because the wooden foundation of the tomb is decaying due to water scarcity. It has been pointed out by politicians, however, that the minarets are designed to tilt slightly outwards to prevent them from crashing on top of the tomb in the event of an earthquake. In 2011, it was reported that some predictions indicated that the tomb could collapse within five years.[78]
Small minarets located at two of the outlying buildings were reported as damaged by a storm on 11 April 2018.[79] On 31 May 2020 another fierce thunderstorm caused some damage to the complex.[80]
Tourism
Visitors at the Taj Mahal
The Taj Mahal attracts a large number of tourists. UNESCO documented more than 2 million visitors in 2001,[81] which had increased to about 7–8 million in 2014.[82] A three-tier pricing system is in place, with a significantly lower entrance fee for Indian citizens and more expensive ones for foreigners. As of 2022, the fee for Indian citizens was ₹50, for citizens of SAARC and BIMSTEC countries, it was ₹540 and for other foreign tourists, it was ₹1,100.[83] Most tourists visit in the cooler months of October, November and February. Polluting traffic is not allowed near the complex and tourists must either walk from parking areas or catch an electric bus. The Khawasspuras (northern courtyards) are currently being restored for use as a new visitor centre.[84][85] In 2019, to address overtourism, the site instituted fines for visitors who stayed longer than three hours.[86]
The small town to the south of the Taj, known as Taj Ganji or Mumtazabad, was initially constructed with caravanserais, bazaars and markets to serve the needs of visitors and workers.[87] Lists of recommended travel destinations often feature the Taj Mahal, which also appears in several listings of seven wonders of the modern world, including the recently announced New Seven Wonders of the World, a recent poll with 100 million votes.[88]
The grounds are open from 06:00 to 19:00 hours on weekdays, except on Friday when the complex is open for prayers at the mosque between 12:00 and 14:00 hours. The complex is open for night viewing on the day of the full moon and two days before and after,[89] excluding Fridays and the month of Ramadan.
Foreign dignitaries often visit the Taj Mahal on trips to India. Notable figures who have travelled to the site include Dwight Eisenhower, Jacqueline Kennedy, Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, George Harrison, Vladimir Putin, Princess Diana, Donald Trump, Justin Trudeau, Prince Charles, Queen Elizabeth, and Prince Philip.[90][91][92][93]
Myths
Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, one of the first European writers about the Taj Mahal
Ever since its construction, the building has been the source of an admiration transcending culture and geography, and so personal and emotional responses have consistently eclipsed scholastic appraisals of the monument.[94] A longstanding myth holds that Shah Jahan planned a mausoleum to be built in black marble as a Black Taj Mahal across the Yamuna river.[14] The idea originates from fanciful writings of Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, a European traveller and gem merchant, who visited Agra in 1665. It was suggested that his son Aurangzeb overthrew Shah Jahan before it could be built. Ruins of blackened marble across the river in the Mehtab Bagh, seemed to support this legend. However, excavations carried out in the 1990s found that they were discoloured white stones that had turned black.[95] A more credible theory for the origins of the black mausoleum was demonstrated in 2006 by archaeologists who reconstructed part of the pool in the Mehtab Bagh. A dark reflection of the white mausoleum could clearly be seen, befitting Shah Jahan's obsession with symmetry and the positioning of the pool itself.[96]
No concrete evidence exists for claims that describe, often in horrific detail, the deaths, dismemberments and mutilations which Shah Jahan supposedly inflicted on various architects and craftsmen associated with the tomb.[97][98] Some stories claim that those involved in construction signed contracts committing themselves to have no part in any similar design. Similar claims are made for many famous buildings.[99] No evidence exists for claims that Lord William Bentinck, governor-general of India in the 1830s, supposedly planned to demolish the Taj Mahal and auction off the marble. Bentinck's biographer John Rosselli says that the story arose from Bentinck's fund-raising sale of discarded marble from Agra Fort.[100]
Another myth suggests that beating the silhouette of the finial will cause water to come forth. To this day, officials find broken bangles surrounding the silhouette.[101]
Several myths, none of which are supported by the archaeological record, have appeared asserting that people other than Shah Jahan and the original architects were responsible for the construction of the Taj Mahal. For instance, in 2000, India's Supreme Court dismissed P. N. Oak's petition[102] to declare that a Hindu king built the Taj Mahal.[99][103] In 2005, a similar petition was dismissed by the Allahabad High Court. This case was brought by Amar Nath Mishra, a social worker and preacher who claimed that the Taj Mahal was built by the Hindu king Paramardi in 1196.[104]
Another such unsupported theory is that the Taj Mahal was designed by an Italian, Geronimo Vereneo, held sway for a brief period after it was first promoted by Henry George Keene in 1879 who went by a translation of a Spanish work Itinerario, (The Travels of Fray Sebastian Manrique, 1629–1643). Another theory that a Frenchman, Austin of Bordeaux designed the Taj was promoted by William Henry Sleeman based on the work of Jean-Baptiste Tavernier. These ideas were revived by Father Hosten and discussed again by E.B. Havell and served as the basis for subsequent theories and controversies.[105]
As of 2017, several court cases about Taj Mahal being a Hindu temple have been inspired by P. N. Oak's theory.[106][107] In August 2017, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) stated there was no evidence to suggest the monument ever housed a temple.[108] Bharatiya Janata Party's Vinay Katiyar in 2017 claimed that the 17th century monument was built by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan after destroying a Hindu temple called "Tejo Mahalaya" and it housed a Shiva linga. This claim had also been made by another BJP member Laxmikant Bajpai in 2014. The BJP government's Union Minister of Culture Mahesh Sharma stated in November 2015 during a session of the parliament, that there was no evidence that it was a temple. The theories about Taj Mahal being a Shiva temple started circulating when Oak released his 1989 book Taj Mahal: The True Story. He claimed it was built in 1155 AD and not in the 17th century, as stated by the ASI.[109]

Look for Taj Museum on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Taj Museum in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Taj Museum" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article is about the organization. For the TV show, see Wildlife SOS (TV series).
hide
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article relies largely or entirely on a single source.
(August 2022)
This article may contain excessive or inappropriate references to self-published sources. (August 2022)
Wildlife SOS
Formation 1995; 29 years ago
Founder Geeta Seshamani, Kartick Satyanarayan
Headquarters New Delhi
Website wildlifesos.org
Wildlife SOS (WSOS) is a conservation non-profit organisation in India, established in 1995 with the primary objective of rescuing and rehabilitating wildlife in distress, and preserving India's natural heritage. It is currently one of the largest wildlife organisations in South Asia.
Although internationally known for groundbreaking work of resolving the cruel and barbaric practice of dancing bears from the streets of India while creating alternative livelihoods for the nomadic communities that depended on the exploitation of the bears, WSOS is also known for their efforts at rescue and rehabilitation of sloth bears and more recently elephants.[1] Wildlife SOS also runs active projects focused on mitigation of human wildlife conflict with regard to species like leopards,[2] macaques,[3] elephants,[4] moon bears,[5] snakes,[6] and other animals across several states in India. In addition, their work includes projects targeted at biodiversity and habitat conservation, awareness workshops and anti-poaching operations, as well as the rehabilitation of communities dependent on performing or working animals for their livelihood.[7]
Wild life SOS features in a documentary show series of History TV called India's Jungle Heroes.[8]
History[edit]
Wildlife SOS was founded in 1995 by Kartick Satyanarayan and Geeta Seshamani with the motive of protecting and preserving India's natural heritage, forests, and wildlife. Initially dedicated to resolving the centuries-old practice of 'dancing' bears, the organisation now runs several projects across the country focused on rescuing wildlife in distress, mitigating human-animal conflict, habitat restoration, raising awareness, training enforcement officers, conducting scientific research, and conservation studies, combating illegal wildlife trade and trafficking and rehabilitating wildlife-dependent communities.
In 2005, as Wildlife SOS co-founders Kartick Satyanarayan and Geeta Seshamani visited the United States for fundraising and awareness engagements, they met with people eager to support the cause.
In 2009, Wildlife SOS UK was launched as a 501(c)3 charity organization in support of the conservation work taking place in India. Wildlife SOS UK works in close collaboration with the volunteers and staff in India to raise awareness and funds for their various ongoing projects. Wildlife SOS UK is a registered charity (charity no. 1126511).
Mission[edit]
Wildlife SOS aims to protect and preserve India's wildlife, run rehabilitation and rescue centres for wildlife, conserve habitats, raise awareness, conduct research, study biodiversity and provide sustainable alternative livelihoods for communities otherwise dependent on wildlife to earn a livelihood.
The organisation is undertaking several conservation projects: Dancing Bear Project, Elephant Conservation and Care, Leopard Conservation, Tribal Rehabilitation Program, Human-Bear Conflict Mitigation, Human-Wildlife Conflict Mitigation, Anti-Poaching, Human-Elephant Conflict Mitigation, Habitat Conservation, Research and Conservation, and Training and Awareness. Wildlife SOS takes a comprehensive approach to saving India's wildlife through:
Conservation[edit]
As populations grow, consumption and related impacts increase, and people and communities become more mobile and connected, it's important to address the interactions of humans and wildlife that share the environment. Making sure there is always a place for wildlife to flourish beyond human meddling in India's crowded landscape is paramount to the mission of WSOS. With projects like human-wildlife conflict mitigation, habitat conservation, and the Dancing Bear Project, the organisation is contributing towards not just the conservation and protection of wild animals but also the habitat they live in.
Animal welfare[edit]
Wildlife SOS works to protect India's wildlife, provides high-quality care for animals who cannot return to the wild and medical treatment for animals that can be released, offers rescue services for captive and abused animals, and advocates to prevent animals from being exploited for entertainment. The organisation is equipped with skilled rescue and medical teams, a dedicated elephant ambulance, 12 sanctuaries, and a Treatment Unit for treating elephants and advanced studies to improve care.[9]
Research[edit]
Wildlife SOS uses technology like drones and camera traps to study elephants, leopards, sloth bears, and other animals in their native habitat. It also conducts animal care studies at its rescue facilities and gathers information to better understand all of India's sensitive and threatened species.[10] WSOS works with partners around the world to learn more about protecting and caring for the species most endangered. Wildlife SOS also works with local communities through outreach programs and workshops to reduce or resolve human-wildlife conflicts.
Community empowerment[edit]
Wildlife SOS works towards empowering local communities like the Kalandar community, which earlier relied on bear dancing for their livelihoods. It imparts education to the children of the Kalandar community and provides opportunities for the members to financially sustain themselves with alternative livelihoods. Moreover, WSOS also provides training to those residing close to human-wildlife conflict zones.
Projects[edit]
Sloth bears[edit]
A Rescued Sloth Bear at the Agra Bear Rescue Facility
The Sloth bear (Melurus ursinus) is a medium-sized omnivorous species of bear found in the Indian subcontinent, predominantly India, with a small population in Nepal and Bhutan and a sub-species in Sri Lanka. This species is listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List.[11]
One of the major threats to these bears has been the exploitation of sloth bears as ‘dancing’ bears by members of a nomadic tribe known as the Kalandars or Qalandars (a trade declared illegal under the Wildlife Protection Act 1972).[12] Today, poaching and trafficking of live bears and their body parts for use in traditional Chinese medicine, increasing human-wildlife conflict, habitat fragmentation and deforestation have led  to the declining numbers of sloth bears in the wild.[13]
A dancing bear and its Kalandar Master
Wildlife SOS is credited with rescuing bears from the ‘dancing bear’ practices and poachers and rehabilitating them in one of four centers in India-
Agra Bear Rescue Facility (2000) in Agra
Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Facility (2005) in Karnataka
Van Vihar Bear Rescue Facility (2006) in Bhopal
Purulia Bear Rescue Centre (2007) in West Bengal
Here, the bears are provided medical care, a nutritious diet, and have the chance to socialize and roam in large, free-range areas. To date, more than 650 sloth bears have been rehabilitated by the organization.[14] Wildlife SOS also carries out ex-situ conservation studies on the bears to enhance existing conservation measures for the species’ survival and provides sustainable, alternative livelihoods to the bears’ former owners and their families.[15]
Elephants[edit]
The Indian elephant (Elephas maximus indicus) is one type of three recognized subspecies of the Asian elephant, native to mainland Asia and is listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List.
Rescued elephants at the Elephant Conservation and Care Centre, Mathura
Elephants are under threat due to poaching, habitat destruction, man-animal conflict, and encroachment etc. Ignorance and a lack of awareness have resulted in the continuous enslavement of these animals as working elephants - to beg, for display in temples, for performances and entertainment.
Wildlife SOS works in collaboration with the Government of India's Project Elephant and in partnership with the Haryana Forest Department at Ban Santour and the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department at Mathura to confiscate abused and mistreated elephants and provide them safe and healthy retirement in one of the three elephant sanctuaries it manages - the Elephant Conservation and Care Centre (set up in 2011) in Mathura, the Elephant Rescue Centre (set up in 2010) in Haryana, and a Treatment Unit (set up in 2018) in Agra.
Wildlife SOS is caring for 35 rehabilitated elephants at these centers. Medical treatment is made available for injured or sick elephants, and handlers, known as mahouts, are trained to carry out humane treatment and management of the animals to improve their working conditions and reduce illicit poaching and mistreatment of the animals.
The main objectives of these centres are to eradicate illegal trafficking and holding of elephants, create a platform for public awareness about the threats faced by Asian elephants, and ensure the safety and protection of elephants in the wild. As a first in India, a humane, modern, and scientific model has been implemented by Wildlife SOS to manage elephants  in order to replace prevailing methods involving abuse and starvation of elephants, and risks to owners and mahouts.
Wildlife SOS veterinarians and trained staff work round the clock to cater to the needs of rescued and rehabilitated Asian elephants. Wildlife SOS has constructed a Treatment Unit in Churmura, Uttar Pradesh, designed to treat injured, sick or geriatric elephants. The Unit is equipped with an inbuilt path lab to test and diagnose elephants for a host of diseases and pathogens and hoist and support structure to deal with emergencies. To avoid spread of diseases, the Treatment Unit quarantines the ailing elephant for the required duration.
The Treatment Unit also has an interpretation centre and observation window for visiting veterinarians, biologists, and elephant caretakers from around the world to observe and learn about veterinary care for captive Asian elephants. The Unit has modern medical facilities for the treatment of injured elephants in distress like Wireless Digital X-Ray, Laser Treatment, Dental X-Ray, Thermal imaging, Hydrotherapy, Tranquilization Equipment, and Quarantine facilities. The Unit is located near Agra, in the Farah block of Mathura near the Elephant Conservation and Care Center (ECCC) run by Wildlife SOS.
'Refuse To Ride' campaign[edit]
Poaching for use in captivity is a serious threat faced by elephants across South and Southeast Asian countries. They are forced to beg on the streets, give rides to tourists, made to perform unnatural tricks in circuses, and kept shackled in temples. The rich cultural and natural heritage of these countries attracts a substantial footfall of tourists every year. For many tourists travelling to India, taking an elephant ride tops their bucket list of must-have experiences. But most people are not aware of the harsh reality behind how elephants have been tamed and the horrific abuse they must endure being "trained" for giving rides.
To combat this cruel industry and educate people about elephant riding, Wildlife SOS launched a campaign called Refuse to Ride, in 2018, with the hope that the RTR campaign will educate the public and help bring a change for elephants all around the country.
Chhattisgarh wild elephant radio collaring project[edit]
The Mahasamund area of Chhattisgarh has been in the throes of human-elephant conflict ever since a herd of 19 wild elephants moved into the region after they were possibly displaced from the shrinking forests of Odisha or Jharkhand. Regular instances of crop-raiding and destruction of human habitations are the reason for the escalation of the conflict. When the Chhattisgarh Forest Department took the initiative to minimize the rapidly growing Human-Elephant Conflict, Wildlife SOS came up with a unique plan to use radio collars on the wild elephant herd so as to issue timely alerts to the villages, by effectively tracking the elephants’ movements.
The radio-collaring program has been successful in raising awareness and involving local communities as stakeholders to effectively mitigate human-elephant conflict situations. The radio collar tracks the location of the matriarch of the herd so we can monitor whether or not she is approaching human settlement areas. Predicting the matriarch's location helps in assessing her possible route, which helps in reaching out to local community representatives to raise alerts in the village. This has led to the mitigation of conflict in areas that are prone to human-elephant encounters. Interactive discussions on the biology, behaviour, and ecology of wild elephants and the safety measures that can be adopted to avoid conflicts were conducted in awareness workshops. These sessions also educate the villagers about the reasons for such conflict, elephant behaviour, essential conflict mitigation strategies, and the importance of Early Warning Systems (EWS). In fact, through these sessions, volunteers actively help in alerting the villages when the elephants are nearby, thereby making communication during the time of distress more efficient and reliable.
Black bears[edit]
Rescued Asiatic Black Bear at the Dachigam Bear Rescue Centre
The Asiatic black bear (Ursus thibetanus), also called the Moon bear, is one of four species of bear found in India. The range of the Asiatic black bear extends across the Himalayas, from Bhutan to Pakistan. It is listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red list.
Wildlife SOS works in Kashmir to mitigate human-animal conflict that arises when bears wander into human settlements, incidents of which increase with deforestation and encroachment. Wildlife SOS has been working with the Jammu and Kashmir Wildlife Protection Department and the Forest Department since 2007, attempting to mitigate the conflict situation in the area.
As part of this project, known as the Moon Bear Conservation Project, Wildlife SOS conducts training workshops for the staff of the J&K Wildlife Protection Department with a focus on capacity building and training in the use of specialized tranquilizing equipment and avoidance behaviour, carries out extensive studies on man-animal conflict situations and treats and rehabilitates animals that fall victim to confrontation- in particular moon bears and leopards. If possible, the animals are released back into the wild, or else they are cared for and treated by Wildlife SOS staff at centers in Pahalgam and Dachigam in Kashmir.
Rescued Leopard at the Wildlife SOS Manikdoh Leopard Rescue Centre
Leopards[edit]
The leopard (Panthera pardus) is one of five big cats found in India (also found in Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Pakistan) and is listed as Near Threatened on the IUCN Red List.
The animals are under threat due to a variety of factors, including but not limited to habitat encroachment and poaching.
The scrub jungle of Maharashtra was ideal habitat for the leopard until incentives for the cultivation of sugarcane lead to rampant callous farming practices and encroachment of the leopards’ habitat, causing man-animal conflict to escalate. In 2008, Wildlife SOS collaborated with the state government on the expansion of the existing Manikdoh Leopard Rescue Centre in Junnar, near Pune, which currently houses 30 leopards. In addition, Wildlife SOS veterinarians and biologists conduct awareness workshops and training programs for local communities, the Forest Department, law enforcement, educational institutions, and forums to help raise awareness and mitigate conflict situations.
Ramdurga habitat conservation[edit]
Wildlife SOS’ habitat conservation project is situated near the Ram Durga valley in Koppal, Karnataka, and aims at protecting critical sloth bear habitat, threatened by illegal mining activities, rampant deforestation, and encroachment by human settlements and industries which, along with poaching, massacred the wildlife of the region. In 2007, Wildlife SOS purchased nearly 40 acres (16 ha) of land in the region, creating a crucial wildlife corridor by allowing at-risk habitats to link up with a patch of Reserve Forest.
The project was expanded in 2012, with the acquisition of an additional 10 acres (4.0 ha) of land, made possible by the support of BHEL, PSSR, Chennai. In consultation with experts, appropriate species of vegetation were selected and an extensive afforestation project was undertaken- planting nearly 10,000 saplings. A bore well, drip irrigation system, and solar-powered electrical fencing were soon acquired. Local community members were employed to manage and patrol the land, allowing the project to achieve a 90% plant survival rate in just 2–3 years. The vegetation flourished and, in areas where conservation efforts had been initiated earlier, species of wildlife have begun returning, including sloth bears, leopards, and endangered species like the pangolin and star tortoise.
In addition, Wildlife SOS works with local communities and stakeholders and educates them so as to increase their involvement in forest protection. The organization works to secure agricultural land along the forested areas, to serve as safe buffers for wildlife.
Anti-poaching[edit]
Wildlife SOS works to curb the illegal trade and trafficking of wildlife and wildlife products - birds, mammals, and reptiles, along with skins, bones, and other body parts harvested from poached animals. Efforts at eradicating the practice of ‘dancing’ bears and related poaching have resulted in a marked reduction in bear poaching as per statistics.
Wildlife SOS’ anti-poaching squad, Forest Watch, consists of a complex network of informants gathering critical information on poachers and criminals involved in the illegal wildlife trade. Forest Watch has assisted the forest department, the police department, and law enforcement agencies to crack down on traffickers and smugglers, recovering animal skins, body parts, ivory, and sometimes live animals from poachers, and even providing legal assistance where required.
Wildlife SOS offers further assistance by conducting grassroots-level training workshops focusing on capacity building and wildlife crime prevention in the field.
Conservation awareness[edit]
Understanding that human involvement is crucial to conservation efforts, Wildlife SOS works with local communities in urban and rural areas to educate people regarding their local wildlife and ecosystem. Programs focus on teaching locals how to live sustainably with their environment, helping people deal with man-animal conflict in vulnerable areas, and involving locals in conservation efforts such as tree plantation drives in Jammu and Kashmir, plastic removal drives in Bannerghatta, Karnataka, and cleaning the Dal Lake with the help of students from local schools and colleges.
Orphaned rhesus macaque rescued by Wildlife SOS
Wildlife SOS also routinely hosts workshops with law officers, forest department enforcement officers, police, and customs officials to educate them about the wildlife trade, recognition of contraband, a basic understanding of related law in the field, conflict mitigation, and rescue techniques to control human-animal conflict.
Rescue helplines[edit]
In addition to its conservation projects, Wildlife SOS runs a 24-hour animal rescue with a team trained to perform emergency rescues of wild animals in four states – Delhi NCR, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, and Jammu and Kashmir. The initiative was started in 1998 and now responds to nearly 500 rescue calls a month. The team rescues animals that have been injured, abandoned, or trapped in urban areas. Common rescues include monkeys, jackals, snakes, monitor lizards, deer, and birds. These are given immediate medical attention and then released to suitable, safer locations. If the release is not possible, the animals are relocated to the WSOS Rescue Centre in Gurgaon, which was set up in 1999.
Since 2010, Wildlife SOS has been working in collaboration with the Gujarat Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (GSPCA) to rescue wildlife trapped in urban localities, particularly snakes and crocodiles in Gujarat. Wildlife SOS's rescue team has animal-control contracts with Indira Gandhi Airport, Delhi Golf Club, Agra Development Authority, Delhi Jal Board, Akbar's Tomb, residential colonies in the city, and the Commonwealth Games village for the 2010 Commonwealth games hosted in India.
Tribal rehabilitation program[edit]
As part of its project to eradicate the erstwhile practice of dancing bears in India, Wildlife SOS runs a simultaneous rehabilitation program for the Qalandar (Kalandar) tribals, for whom the bears provided a source of livelihood. The program, started in 2001, includes incentives for the bear-owners, in the form of sustainable livelihood alternatives. Wildlife SOS may provide seed funds for ventures or assist in the purchase of shops, handcarts, bicycles, cycle-rickshaws, auto-rickshaws, or something that could support an alternative career for the individual, as well as providing training for alternative jobs as drivers, small scale poultry or goat farmers, metallurgy or gem-cutting and stone polishing for costume jewelry. Rehabilitated tribals form nearly 50% of the workforce at Wildlife SOS rescue centres.
Wildlife SOS also organizes vocational courses and seed funding for the womenfolk of the community to start businesses in the states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, and Haryana, sets up self-help groups, and provides them with marketing links, wherever necessary. This allows them to become secondary breadwinners for the family and empowers them through financial independence.
Further, Wildlife SOS provides educational opportunities for the children of Kalandars, helping them break out of the cycle of poverty and oppression and resolving the dependency on ‘dancing’ bears for income, thereby reducing poaching and mistreatment of the animals.
Wildlife SOS is also involved in the rehabilitation of other traditionally wildlife-dependent communities including the Saperas, an originally nomadic, Muslim tribe of snake-charmers, hiring the community members to work with them as animal rescue workers.
Star tortoise repatriation project[edit]
Wildlife SOS released over 51 Indian star tortoises as a part of the Wildlife SOS Indian Star Tortoise Repatriation Project. These tortoises, along with over 100 others, were confiscated in Singapore, luckily before they were put on the black market to be sold as pets or food. Wildlife SOS worked with ACRES (Animal Concerns Research and Education Society), a non-profit group based in Singapore and CITES, and the Central Government & Forest Department of Karnataka to get the tortoises back to India. Once back in India, they were placed in soft release enclosures next to the Wildlife SOS field station in Ramdurga Reserve Forest in the southern state of Karnataka, where they could reacclimate to their native conditions before being released back to the wild.
This is the first time that a unique and innovative satellite telemetry study of Indian Star tortoises rescued from the illegal wildlife trafficking industry has been initiated. A team of researchers and wildlife biologists monitor the movements and ranging patterns of the tortoises in the wild. The Satellite Tags attached to some of the tortoises indicate their movement pattern, pace, and location using satellite locations. As a part of the research study, factors like health condition, body weight, behaviour patterns, adaptation to wild foraging, etc. are also being documented. The Satellite tags combined with radio transmitters are attached to the carapace of the tortoises which is the dorsal portion of its shell). This will enable the research team to track and monitor the movements and ranging patterns of the tortoises.
'The Wild Side' with Wildlife SOS![edit]
"The Wild Side" with Wildlife SOS is an online talk show featuring Bollywood celebrities, philanthropists, conservationists, and wildlife filmmakers from across the globe to create awareness about wildlife and nature conservation. Hosted by the NGO's co-founder and CEO— Kartick Satyanarayan, the show shares good news, lessons from the lockdown, and thoughts on wildlife conservation amidst rapid-fire sessions.
The Wild Side features conversations with noted guests such as Jim Sarbh, Randeep Hooda, Farah Khan Kunder, Adil Hussain, philanthropist and entrepreneur Roshni Nadar, conservationist and actor Katie Cleary, and award-winning Wildlife filmmakers Sandesh Kadur and Shaaz Jung. The 30-minute segment is an informative and lively opportunity for viewers to learn about the challenges in wildlife and environmental conservation.
It was launched on the 5 June 2020 to commemorate World Environment Day.
Elephant Tails podcast[edit]
The Elephant Tails Podcast from Wildlife SOS brings you intimate stories and behind-the-scenes perspectives with the people working to save India's wildlife. A continuing podcast with 7 episodes so far, the show aims to dive into the depths of Wildlife SOS’ work and the many challenges faced by the teams regularly.
From rescuing animals from myriad scenarios - elephants from abject negligence and abuse, leopards from open wells - to researching sloth bears and their denning habits via camera traps, the podcast aims to shed light on the work undertaken by Wildlife SOS in an effort to spread awareness.
Publications and papers[edit]
Notable publications include:
Geeta Seshamani, Kartick Stayanarayan; Dancing Bears of India (1997)
Brij Kishor Gupta, R. Singh, Kartick Satyanarayan, Geeta Seshamani; Trade in Bears and Their Parts in India : Threats to Conservation of Bears (2006)
Wildlife SOS; Gall Bladder in the State of Uttarakhand (2006)
Usham Singh; Conservation and Science: Human-Leopard Conflict Study in Jammu and Kashmir, India (2008)
Kartick Satyanarayan; Working with Government Agencies: Wildlife Crime Enforcement, Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation (2008)
Dr. Arun A. Sha; Dental Diseases in Sloth Bears and Tigers and Their Treatment (2008)
Wildlife SOS has published numerous field reports and veterinary papers as well.[16]

Look for Art of Living International Center on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Art of Living International Center in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Art of Living International Center" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Bangalore Palace" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Bangalore Palace
Front façade of the Bangalore Palace
General information
Architectural style Tudor Revival architecture
Location Inner Bangalore
Town or city Bangalore
Country India
Coordinates 12.9987°N 77.5920°E
Construction started April 1874
Completed 1878
Owner Pramoda Devi Wadiyar
Bangalore Palace is a 19th century royal palace located in Bangalore, Karnataka, India, in an area that was owned by the Rev. John Garrett, the first principal of the Central High School in Bangalore, now famous as Central College. The commencement of the construction of the palace is attributed to him.The palace belongs to Maharaja Srikantadatta Narasimharaja Wadiyar and his wife Her Highness Pramoda Devi Wadiyar.
Construction[edit]
This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (November 2022)
Interior décor[edit]
The Durbar Hall, Bangalore Palace (1890; Curzon Collection's 'Souvenir of Mysore Album'[1])
Geometric tile and wallpaper in Bangalore Palace
Renovation[edit]
Aerial view of Bangalore Palace and grounds
Maharaja's Palace at Bangalore. Lee-Warner Collection 'Souvenirs of Kolhapur. Installation of H.H. the Maharajah, 1894'
The palace grounds are used for holding public events including music concerts.
International Concerts[edit]
Many international artists have performed in the grounds. Today a legal battle between government and the Mysore royal family has seen a ban of commercial activities. Nevertheless, a number of private companies controlled by the royal family runs a number of wedding halls on the grounds. For the past 34 years the oldest security agency of Karnataka named Scorpion Security Ltd has their national headquarters inside the palace premises.
Over the past few years, the palace grounds have been hosts to major music artists like: Iron Maiden, Aerosmith, Backstreet Boys, Bryan Adams, Delirious?, Don Moen, Hillsong United, David Guetta, Elton John, Deep Purple, Petra, Textures, Amon Amarth, Lamb of God, Mark Knopfler, Akon, The Black Eyed Peas, The Rolling Stones, Sepultura, Mr Big, Metallica, Megadeth, Michael Learns to Rock, Roger Waters, Guns N' Roses, The Prodigy, Dream Theater, No Doubt, Sepultura, Scorpions, Enrique Iglesias, Machine Head, Cradle of Filth, Jay Sean, Ludacris and Flo Rida.
Iron Maiden's performance in 2007 was a historic gig named Eddfest in the sub-continent. The concert was part of the band's A Matter of Life and Death Tour. The name Eddfest is taken from the band's mascot Eddie. The concert is the largest paid concert ever to take place in India with an estimated 38,000 people in attendance with 4000 people watching from outside the venue without tickets. It marked the first visit of Iron Maiden to the Indian subcontinent, and the first major heavy metal concert to take place in the country.
Jay Sean, Ludacris and Flo Rida performed in Palace Grounds on 22 September 2011 for the opening ceremony of the Champions League T20.
Metallica performed at the palace grounds on 30 October 2011 as part of the Rock N India festival, their first show in India which was attended by 31,000 people.[2] It would also turn out to be the last concert to take place as the state government and police stopped giving permission for any future musical events or concerts at the venue (all concerts banned).
Fun World[edit]
Fun World is an amusement park situated in the palace grounds. This amusement park is allowed under permission from Smt Pramoda Devi Wadiyar, owner and legal heir to Late Sri Srikantadatta Narasimharaja Wadiyar. It has various joy rides, water park and snow room.
Amusement park in palace grounds complex

Bannerghatta National Park
IUCN category II (national park)
Tiger at the Bannerghatta National Park
Bannerghatta Biological Park
Location Karnataka, India
Nearest city Bangalore
Coordinates 12°48′03″N 77°34′32″E
Area 260.51 km2 (100.58 sq mi)
Established 1974
Governing body Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India
bannerghattabiologicalpark.org
Bannerghatta National Park is a national park in India, located near Bangalore, Karnataka. It was founded in 1970 and declared as a national park in 1974.[1] In 2002, a small portion of the park became a zoological garden, the Bannerghatta Biological Park.[2]
There are ancient temples in the park for worship and it is a destination for trekking and hiking. Within the national park area are six rural villages enclosed within three large enclosures for sheep and cattle farming.[3] This park offers a wide range of diverse wildlife to the explorers. Coming from the finest of Bengaluru, Karnataka, this park offers a guided bus tour all along the 6 km safari roads, which is specially made for safaris and foreign tourist gatherers.
Between 1995 and 2021, the dry deciduous forests in the National Park shrunk approximately by 44% due to uncontrolled diversion of forest land for agricultural purpose, urbanisation, etc[1]
Geography[edit]
The 65,127.5 acre (260.51 km2[4]) national park is located about 22 km south of Bangalore in the hills of the Anekal range with an elevation of 1245 - 1634m.[5] The park has a hilly terrain of granite sheets under moist deciduous forest valleys and scrubland on higher areas.[6] Sixteen villages border the park. Most of the national park consists of artificial forest, and some animals have been introduced.[7] The park is part of a wildlife corridor for elephants which connects the BR Hills and the Sathyamangalam forest. The park is contiguous with Talli reserve forest in the southeast and Bilikal forest in the south.[3]
Water sources[edit]
The park's rainfall is 700 mm per year. The Suvarnamukhi stream runs through the national park. On 15 May 2014, four bore wells were opened to provide water in dry times.[8]
Flora[edit]
Flora in the park include:[5]
Narcissus latifolia
Schleichera oleosa
Terminalia tomentosa
Sandalwood
Neem
T. arjuna
Grewia tilaefolia
Santalum album
Tamarind
Bamboo
Eucalyptus
Bauhinia purpurea
Samanea saman
Peltphorum pterocarpum

Indian elephants
gaur
Indian leopard
jackal
fox
sloth bear
Indian gazelle
spotted deer
barking deer
common langur
bonnet macaque
porcupine
hare
wild boar
pangolin
Royal Bengal tiger
slender loris
monitor lizard
cobras
python
Russell's viper
krait
peacock
crocodile
Asiatic lion
Flamingo
Nilgai
Blackbuck
Pelican
Indian wolf
Striped hyena
Himalayan black bear
Fauna from other countries
Giraffe
Hamadryas baboon
wild bear
One hundred and one species of birds have been recorded in the park.[9] The fauna pose some risk to humans. In August 2012, a man was trampled to death by an elephant.[10] Occasionally, animals leave the reserve, coming into contact with humans. For example, elephants have been sighted on the Bantamweight-Anekal road which passes close to the park. In 2007, a leopard and her cubs entered a local school.[11]
Illegal mining around Bannerghatta national park[edit]
The park is threatened by multiple granite quarries operating around the national park.[12] These quarries are located alarmingly close to critical elephant corridors inside the national park such as Kardikal - Madeswara corridor.[13] While there is ban on mining and granite quarrying around the national park within a radius of One km from the boundary demarcated as "Safe Zone", quarries operate unabatedly. Vehicular movement is also uncontrolled. Tremors from the explosives used in the quarry operations are felt across a radius of at least five km adversely affecting elephants and other wild animals.[14]
In Popular Culture[edit]
Bannerghatta, A 2021 Malayalam language movie released on Amazon Prime , Title of the film is based on the Bannerghatta National park.[15]
Gallery[edit]
Bannerghata National Park

Commercial Street may refer to:
Commercial Street, Bangalore, India
Commercial Street, Leeds, England
Commercial Street, London, England
Commercial Street, Newport, Wales
Commercial Street, Portland, Maine, USA
Commercial Street, San Francisco, USA

Cubbon Park
Sri Chamarajendra Park
Neighbourhood
Cubbon Park
Location in Bengaluru, India
Coordinates: 12°58′30″N 77°35′36″E
Country  India
State Karnataka
District Bengaluru Urban
Metro Bengaluru
Founded 1870
Founded by Sir John Meade[1]
Named for Maharaja Chamarajendra Wadiyar X
Government
 • Body Department of Horticulture, Government of Karnataka
Area
 • Total 1.2 km2 (0.5 sq mi)
Languages
 • Official Kannada
Time zone UTC+5:30 (IST)
Pin Code
560001
Website http://www.horticulture.kar.nic.in/cubbon.htm
A Map of Cubbon Park made with OpenStreetMap
Cubbon Park, officially Sri Chamarajendra Park,[1] is a landmark park in Bengaluru, located in the heart of the city in the Central Administrative Area. Originally created in 1870 under Major General Richard Sankey, then British Chief Engineer of Mysore State, it covered an area of 100 acres (0.40 km2). Subsequent expansion has since taken place and the park's area is now reported to be 300 acres (1.2 km2).[2] It has a rich recorded history of abundant flora and fauna plantations coupled with numerous impressive and aesthetically located buildings and statues of famous personages, in its precincts.[3][4]
This public park was first named as Meade's Park after Sir John Meade, the acting commissioner of Mysuru in 1870 and subsequently renamed as Cubbon Park after the longest-serving commissioner of the time, Sir Mark Cubbon. To commemorate the Silver Jubilee of Sri Krishnaraja Wodeyar's rule in Mysore State, in 1927, the park was again renamed as Sri. Chamarajendra Park, in memory of the 19th-century ruler of the state Sri Chamarajendra Wodeyar (1868–94), during whose rule the park came into existence.[5]
The landscaping in the park creatively integrates natural rock outcrops with thickets of trees, massive bamboos, with grassy expanse and flowerbeds and the monuments within its limits, regulated by the Horticulture Department of the Government of Karnataka. The predominantly green area of the park has many motorable roads, and the well-laid-out walking paths running through the park are frequented by early morning walkers and the naturalists who study plants in the tranquil natural environment.[5] Tourists visiting this park in the city of Bengaluru have nicknamed the city itself as 'Garden City'.[6]
The importance of the park to the city's environment is best stated by two urban architects who have won the national competition to design 'Freedom Park'.
Access[edit]
The park is accessible from M.G. Road, Kasturba Road, Hudson Circle and Ambedkar Veedhi (Road). The motorable roads which run through the park are allowed for light motor vehicles only. All locations of the park are accessible through walking paths. The park is open to the public at all times but the roads around the park are closed for traffic from 5:00 to 8:00 am every day to provide more safety and fresh environment for morning walkers and exercisers and also this park will be closed on every Sundays[7]
Botanical assets[edit]
Indigenous and exotic botanical species found in the park are about 68 genera and 96 species with a total of around 6000 plants/trees. Indigenous species found in the park are:[8] artocarpus, cassia fistula, ficus, polyalthias etc., and exotic species such as araucaria, bamboo, castanospermum australe, grevillea robusta, millettia, peltophorum, schinus molle, swietenia mahagoni, tabebuia. sp etc.
Amongst the ornamental and flowering exotic trees lining the roads in the park are the Grevillea robusta (silver oak)—the first oaks introduced to Bangalore from Australia[5]—and the delonix or the gulmohar tree (bright red flowers with long petals) along the Cubbon road in the park, which is a widely cultivated tropical ornamental tree around the world.[9]
Avenues[edit]
The avenue of araucarias along with canna beds on either sides of the road from the Central Public Library to Hudson circle, avenue of Swieteninas in the Northern side of the park, the Java fig avenue along the road leading to the Government Museum, polyalthia avenue along the road from Queen Victoria's statue to King Edward VII's statue and the chestnut tree avenue from the Chamarajendra statue to Siddalingaiah circle are testimony to the botanical richness of the park. Other attractions at the park are the Ringwood circle, lotus pond and bamboo grove nook.[5]
Historical buildings and monuments integral to the park[edit]
The formal gardens, from the central hall of the original Attara Kacheri (means 18 government offices) now the Karnataka High Court, extends along the ceal promenade developed symmetrically with avenues, to the museum building. Another impressive artistic structure is Iyer Hall, which houses the Central Library with a rose garden as a frontage. It is undisputedly the largest public library in the state as evidenced by the college students thronging to read here, and has the world's most extensive collection of Braille books. Other buildings located within or at the periphery of the park are 1) the Indira Priyadarshini Children's Library, 2) the Venkatappa Art Gallery, 3) the Aquarium (stated to be the second largest in India), 4) the YMCA, 5) Yuvanika — the State Youth Centre, 6) Century Club, 7) Press Club, 8) Jawahar Bal Bhavan, 9) Tennis Pavilion, 10) the Cheshire Dyer Memorial Hall and 11) the Ottawa Chatter.[5]
St Mark's Church, From Cubbon Park, Bengaluru
St. Mark's Church and Band Stand, Bangalore (1870). 'Views in Bangalore', of the Vibart Collection, by Albert Thomas[10]
Inauguration of the statue of Sir Mark Cubbon, Bengaluru India. Illustrated London News, 5 May 1866[11]
Cubbon Park, Bengaluru (1890). Curzon Collection's 'Souvenir of Mysore Album'[12]
A bandstand, in an octagonal shape made with cast-iron, was built in the early part of the 1900s. Before India's Independence, the British Royal Air Force used to play western band music at the band stand every Saturday evening.[13] An attraction for children is the well planned children's amusement park as part of Jawahar Bal Bhavan, which has the toy train, Puttani Express that runs (0.75 miles or 1.2 km) within the park, the Doll museum and a boating facility. A 20-million-year-old fossilized tree — a gift from the Geological Survey of India, is also reported at the park.[14]
Memorials in the form of marble statues in honour of Queen Victoria (installed in 1906), King Edward VII (installed in 1919), Major General Sir Mark Cubbon, Sri Chamarajendra Wodeyar (installed in 1927) and Sir K. Sheshadri Iyer (installed (in 1913) are seen located in front of the historical buildings within the park.[5]
Attara Kacheri[edit]
Originally Attarakacheri now the High Court of Karnataka in Bangalore at the entrance to Cubbon Park
Attara Kacheri, built in 1864 A.D during British rule, is a stone structure in an intense red hue, a two storied building with Corinthian columns in Gothic Style of architecture and is located at the entrance to the park. The Public offices (Secretariat of the Government of Karnataka) were located here from 1868 AD to 1956 AD, which were later moved to the Vidhana Soudha, opposite to it. The building now accommodates the Karnataka High Court. In the Central Hall a portrait of Sir Mark Cubbon decorates the ceiling. An equestrian statue of Cubbon by Baron Marochetti is located at the back of the building.[15][16]
Museum[edit]
The State Archeological Museum, one of the oldest in India, built in 1876 by Colonel Sankey, located within the park, is similar in design to the Attara Kacheri in its architectural style and hue. While the original collection in the museum belonged to Benjamin L. Rice of the Mysore Gazetteer, antiquities from Mohenjodaro period are on display in the museum. Exhibits in the museum include specimens of Vijaynagara and Halebid architecture, ancient coins and stone inscriptions as old as 5000 years.[16][17]
Seshadri Iyer Memorial Hall[edit]
Seshadri Iyer Memorial Hall, built in 1915 in a classic European style with Tuscan and Corinthian columns, in honour of Sir K. Seshadri Iyer who was Dewan of Mysore State from 1883 to 1901, is an impressive red building with gables. It houses the Seshadri Memorial library.[16] The memorial building is ensconced in the middle of the park, framed by the greenery of the park and fronted by the rose garden.[14] The library has an area of 300 km 2 and functions as the apex of the Karnataka Public Libraries system, which is governed by State Library Authority. In 2000, the library was awarded the Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation Award for the best state central library in India in recognition of its outstanding contribution to meritorious services rendered in the spread of knowledge and gearing up of library movement in the city of Bengaluru in particular and in the state of Karnataka in general. The library has presently a collection of 265,000 books and also a braille section.
Seshadri Iyer Memorial Library in Cubbon Park (Front)
Seshadri Iyer Memorial Library in Cubbon Park (Back)
Preservation Act, 1979[edit]
The Preservation Act, 1979, passed by the Government of Karnataka to preserve the uniqueness of the park is under the provision of Karnataka Government Park (Preservation) Act, 1975,[18] which states:
Accordingly, it is directed that neither any land should be granted to nor any further constructions be permitted whether temporary or permanent by any organization or individuals in the Cubbon Park and Lalbagh areas except the constructions taken up by the Horticulture Department in furtherance of the objectives of the department.
Awareness campaign[edit]
The Centre for Environment Education (CEE), India, in the year 2006, embarked on a project to develop a brochure on the park and involve the youth in several activities to help them to explore the park and through it, learn more about the wider environment. The brochure brought out as a joint effort of CEE and the Department of Horticulture.[citation needed]
Honoring Mark Cubbon[edit]
After being largely ignored since Indian independence in 1947, a large number of people have slowly started to acknowledge the pioneering work done by Mark Cubbon and other British administrators. On 23 August 2013, the statue of Mark Cubbon was garlanded for the first time since 1947, by Advocate S Umesh of the Cubbon Park Walkers' Association. The occasion was to mark the 238th birth anniversary of Sir Mark Cubbon. Special permission was obtained from the Karnataka High Court, and police protection was provided. The group credited Mark for being one of the chief architects of Bengaluru and Mysuru. The move was however opposed by Vatal Nagaraj, infamous for vandalizing the Cenotaph Memorial near the Hudson Memorial Church. However, the association defended their move of honoring Mark Cubbon, as his contribution to Bengaluru was undeniable. Cubbon Park was renamed as Sri Chamarajendra Park way back in 1927, but the name was never popular, and people continued to call it Cubbon Park. Further, according to historians, it would be foolish to erase history, by trying to remove all symbols of British rule, and mere symbolism cannot lead to development.[19][20]
On 28 June 2020, the equestrian statue of Mark Cubbon was moved to the park grounds from the premises of Karnataka High Court.[21][22]
Gallery[edit]
Cubbon Park
Statue of Sir K.Sheshadri Iyer
Bamboos and other trees in Cubbon Park
Avenues and road within the park
Peguensis/ovalifolia or Moulmein Rosewood tree
Pongam or Honge (Pongamia pinnata) planted as avenue trees
The Java Pink Cassia or Cassia javanica
Spanish Mahogany tree found in Cubbon Park
Grevillea robusta (silver oak)
Gulmohar tree
Cubbon Park Road
Statue of Queen Victoria, near Cubbon Park
Statue of Edward VII, near Cubbon Park
Delonix or ornamental Gulmohar flower seen in profusion in the Cubbon Park
State Central Library or Sheshadri Memorial Hall
Location in context[edit]
show
Areas of Bengaluru

ISKCON Temple Bengaluru
The temple at night
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District Bangalore
Deity Radha Krishnachandra
Festivals Janamashtami, Radhashtami, Gaura Purnima
Location
Location Rajajinagar
State Karnataka
Country India
Architecture
Type Hindu temple architecture
Completed 1997; 27 years ago[1][2]
Temple(s) 3
Website
www.iskconbangalore.org
Sri Radha Krishna-Chandra Temple (Kannada: ಶ್ರೀ ರಾಧಾ ಕೃಷ್ಣ ಮಂದಿರ) is one of the largest Krishna-Hindu temples in the world. It is situated in Bangalore in the Indian state of Karnataka. The temple is dedicated to Hindu deities Radha Krishna and propagates monotheism as mentioned in Chandogya Upanishad.[3]
History[edit]
In May 1997, Bangalore ISKCON Temple was inaugurated by the ninth president of India, Shankar Dayal Sharma.[3][2] The society was registered in the year 1978 under the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960. The objectives of the society are derived from the Seven Purposes of ISKCON as stated by Srila Prabhupada.
About temple[edit]
Features of the temple[edit]
There is a gold-plated dhwaja-stambha (flag post) 17 m (56 ft) high and a gold plated kalash shikhara 8.5 m (28 ft) high. There is free distribution of Sri Krishna prasadam to all visitors during the darshana hours.[4]
Shrines (altars)[edit]
ISKCON Bangalore has six shrines:
Main deities is of Radha-Krishna
Krishna Balrama
Nitai Gauranga (Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda)
Srinivasa Govinda (also known as Venkateswara)
Prahlada Narasimha
Srila Prabhupada[5]
Daily ceremonies[edit]
The day begins at 4:30 with a ceremony called mangala-arati followed by worship of Tulasi Devi, Sri Narasimha Arati, and Suprabhata Seva for Sri Srinivasa Govinda. Later there is Shringara Darshana Arati, and Japa Meditation session. At 19:00 arati starts, where devotees sing kirtan. In the main temple, the arati is performed by three priests. This arati is followed again by kirtan where devotees can be seen dancing to the rhythm of "Hare Krishna Hare Rama".
ISKCON Vaikuntha Hill[edit]
ISKCON Vaikuntha Hill in Bangalore is the destination for a visit to Lord Venkateshwara’s abode. This stone temple is constructed as per traditional Shilpa shastras (designs as mentioned in scriptures) in the Dravidian style of architecture. The design and aesthetics, including the seven doors to the sanctum, are inspired by the Sri Venkateshwara Swamy temple in Tirumala. The deity of Lord Srinivasa is nearly the same height, and has been named Sri Rajadhiraja Govinda, which means He is the King of all kings. This project was conceived and executed by the devotees of ISKCON Bangalore, in pursuance of Srila Prabhupada's desire to build a grand temple like Tirumala, on his 125th birth anniversary.
About ISKCON Sri Rajadhiraja Govinda temple Sri Rajadhiraja Govinda Temple is surrounded by the shrines of Sri Sudarshana Narasimha, Sri Mahalakshmi, Sri Lakshmi Narasimha, Bhakta Hanuman, and Sri Garuda. A separate shrine has been constructed for Srila Prabhupada, where his Achala Shila Murti, a black stone deity, is installed. Story of Vaikuntha Hill and its connection with Lord Srinivasa Govinda The hill on which the temple resides is related to the divine story of a muni, Shri Mandavya muni, who performed very severe penance in a cave on this hill. Lord Srinivasa Govinda, pleased, wanted to grant a boon and a blessing to Shri Mandavya Muni, so promised him that after he married Princess Padmavathi Devi at Tirumala, he would come to the hill, where he had performed penance, to perform the Leela of vihara or honeymoon. This sacred place thus came to be known as Vasanthapura. The name Vasanthapura signifies the place where Lord Govinda had arrived for his Vasantha Vihara (spring outing).
The divine opening ceremony The temple was inaugurated in a grand ceremony on Jun 14, 2022, by Shri Ram Nath Kovind, Former President of India. He dedicated ISKCON Sri Rajadhiraja Govinda Temple & Cultural Complex in a grand ceremony of Lokarpana on the occasion of the 125th birth anniversary of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, Founder-Acharya of ISKCON. The opening ceremony was also presided over by the Governor of Karnataka Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot, Chief Minister of Karnataka Shri Basavaraj Bommai, Member of the Legislative Assembly Shri M Krishnappa, in the presence of Madhu Pandit Dasa, President of ISKCON Rajajinagar, Bangalore.
Festivals[edit]
ISKCON Bangalore celebrates festivals that are either related to avatars of Lord Vishnu or with Vedic culture. Main festivals that are celebrated within the temple are:
Rama Navami
Brahmotsava
Narasimha Jayanti
Panihati Chida-dahi Utsav
Ratha Yatra
Balaram Jayanti
Jhulan Utsav
Sri Krishna Janmashtami
Vyasa Puja
Sri Radhashtami
Deepotsava
Govardhan Puja
Vaikuntha Ekadashi
Nityananda Trayodashi
Gaura Poornima
Social services[edit]
Khichdi prasāda in ecofriendly Areca-leaf traditional Indian Droṇa at ISKCON Temple Bangalore.
ISKCON Bangalore provides free food to those in need.[6] The Akshaya Patra Foundation is one initiative started by members of the temple, which has received praise from United States' former President Barack Obama for feeding and educating children across India. [7]
The Akshaya Patra Foundation is principally involved in implementing the Mid-Day Meal program for children in Government and Government-aided schools across India. It follows a Public-Private Partnership model of operation and hence has been working in partnership with the Central and State Governments. It was set up in the year 2000 and runs the world's largest NGO-run Mid-Day Meal Programme. Akshaya Patra is currently[when?] operating in 27 locations across 11 states of India. It feeds 1.6 million children from over 13,500 government and government-aided schools every day.
Gallery[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to ISKCON Temple, Bangalore.
ISKCON Bangalore Temple at night
Main entrance of the temple
Pond near the Temple campus
ISKCON Vaikunta Hill, Kanakpura Road

Look for Innovative Film City on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Innovative Film City in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Innovative Film City" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
For other uses, see Lalbagh.
Lalbagh Botanical Garden
Botanical Garden
The Lalbagh Glass House in the Botanical Garden
Nickname: Lalbagh
Lalbagh Botanical Garden
Location in Bangalore, India
Coordinates: 12.95°N 77.59°E
Country India
State Karnataka
District Bangalore Urban
Metro Bangalore
Founded by Hyder Ali
Area
 • Total 0.971 km2 (0.375 sq mi)
Languages
 • Official Kannada
Time zone UTC+5:30 (IST)
The bandstand
Lalbagh Botanical Garden or simply Lalbagh (lit. 'red garden'), is an botanical garden in Bangalore, India, with an over 200-year history. First planned and laid out during the dalavaiship of Hyder Ali, the garden was later managed under numerous British Superintendents before Indian Independence. It was responsible for the introduction and propagation of numerous ornamental plants as well as those of economic value. It also served a social function as a park and recreational space, with a central glass house dating from 1890 which was used for flower shows. In modern times, it hosts two flower shows coinciding with the week of Republic Day (26 January) and Independence Day (15 August). As an urban green space along with Cubbon Park, it is also home to numerous wild species of birds and other wildlife. The garden also has a lake adjoining a large rock on which a watchtower had been constructed during the reign of Kempegowda II.
History[edit]
Lalbagh Botanical Garden Glass House, dating from 1889
Lalbagh Gardens of Bangalore were originally laid out by Hyder Ali and were modeled on gardens in Sira[1] laid out by its last Mughal Subedar, Dilawar Khan (r.1726–1756).
The Lalbagh Glasshouse at night
Hyder Ali commissioned the building of this garden in 1760, but his son, Tipu Sultan, completed it. A Bagh is Hindustani for garden while the reference of the prefix Lal is debated and could refer to the colour red due to its original floral composition but Lal also means "beloved". Hyder Ali decided to create this garden on the lines of the Mughal Gardens that were gaining popularity during his time. Hyder Ali laid out these famous botanical gardens and his son Tipu Sultan added horticultural wealth to them by importing trees and plants from several countries. Hyder and Tipu's Lalbagh gardens were managed by Mohammed Ali and his son Abdul Khader, and were based on design of the Mughal Gardens that once stood at Sira, at a distance of 120 km from Bangalore. At that time, Sira was the headquarters of the strategically important southernmost Mughal "suba" (province) of the Deccan before the British Raj.[2]
The Lalbagh gardens were commissioned by the 18th century; over the years, it acquired India's first lawn-clock and the subcontinent's largest collection of rare plants.[3] After the British conquest of Kingdom of Mysore in 1799, the garden was under the charge of Major Gilbert Waugh, Company paymaster and in 1814 its control was transferred to the Government of Mysore with an appeal by Waugh to the Marquis of Hastings that it should be under the botanical garden at Fort William, Calcutta. This was accepted and the charge for supervision was given to Nathaniel Wallich on 24 April 1819. This continued until 1831 when charge moved to the Mysore Commissioner. An Agricultural and Horticultural Society had been formed with William Munro, an army officer and amateur botanist in charge of the Bangalore chapter. The Society wrote to the Mysore Commissioner, Sir Mark Cubbon, requesting charge of the Lalbagh garden. Cubbon granted control and during this period it was used for horticultural training. The Bangalore chapter of the Society was dissolved in 1842, leaving the gardens unmanaged.[1][4]
In 1855, Hugh Cleghorn, was appointed as a botanical advisor to the Commissioner of Mysore. Cleghorn and Jaffrey, superintendent of the Madras Agri-Horticultural Society looked at various sites for a horticultural garden and found that Lalbagh suited their purpose despite being located at a distance from the Cantonment, the British centre of the city. He suggested that a European Superintendent be appointed with control under the Chief Commissioner. Cleghorn was against the use of Lalbagh for commercial enterprise and instead suggested that it should aim to improve the use of indigenous plants, aid in introducing useful exotic species and help in the exchange of plant and seed materials with other gardens at Madras, Calcutta and Ooty. Under Cubbon's orders, Lalbagh was made into the Government Botanical Garden in August 1856 and a professional horticulturist was sought from Kew. William New was recommended and he arrived at Bangalore on 10 April 1858. New's contract ended in 1863-64 and he was replaced by Allan Adamson Black who worked at the Kew Herbarium.[1][4]
Black, however, suffered from poor health and resigned in 1865. He died after visiting his brother in Rangoon aboard HMS Dalhousie, off the Coco Islands on 4 December 1865.[5] New was then re-appointed. In his 1861 catalogue of the plants of Lalbagh, there were numerous economic and ornamental plants including Cinchona, coffee, tea, macadamia nuts, hickory, pecan, rhododendrons, camellias, and bougainvilleas. New died in 1873 and was followed by John Cameron, also from Kew. Cameron had the additional support of the Maharaja of Mysore who was appointed in 1881 and introductions included Araucarias (A. cookii and A. bidwilli), cypresses (Cupressus sempervirens), topiaries made from Hamelia patens.[6]
In 1890-91, a central bandstand and the glasshouse (for flowershows) made with iron pillars cast by Walter Macfarlane and Company of Glasgow were added. Cameron also helped introduce commercial crops like cabbage, cauliflower, turnip, radish, rhubarb, celery, and kohlrabi. Trees introduced included the baobab from Africa, Brownea rosea from the Caribbean, and Catha edulis from Yemen.[6] Cameron retired in 1908 and was followed by Gustav Herman Krumbiegel.[4] A menagerie and an aviary had been established in the 1860s. A pigeon house or dovecot for 100 birds was built. Following the plague the maintenance deteriorated and there was a proposal to close the menagerie and aviary in the 1900s. in 1914. Captain S.S.Flower reported that it included a court built between 1850 and 1860 having tigers and rhinoceros; an aviary; a monkey house with an orangutan; a paddock with blackbuck, chital, Sambar deer, barking deer, and a pair of emus; a bear house and a peacock enclosure.[7][8]
In 1874, Lalbagh had an area of 45 acres (180,000 m2). In 1889, 30 acres were added to the eastern side, followed by 13 acres in 1891 including the rock with Kempegowda tower and 94 acres more in 1894 on the eastern side just below the rock bringing it to a total of 188 acres (760,000 m2).[9] The foundation stone for the Glass House, modeled on London's Crystal Palace was laid on 30 November 1889 by Prince Albert Victor and was built during the time of John Cameron.[9][10] It was built with cast iron from the Saracen Foundry in Glasgow UK. This structure was extended in 1935, this time with steel from the Mysore Iron and Steel Company at Bhadravathi.[4]
The Horticultural Department decided to close Lalbagh Botanical Garden on Saturday 21 March 2020, in order to avoid public gatherings in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.[11] In the third week of May the government allowed parks to be open only from 7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 7 p.m.[12]
The COVID-19 pandemic forced the cancellation of the Lalbagh flower show on Independence Day in 2020.[13] Due to the pandemic, mango and jackfruit melas were also not conducted at Lalbagh in 2020.[14]
Overview[edit]
Lalbagh is a 240 acres (0.97 km2) garden and is located in south Bangalore. It holds two flower shows and has over 1,000 species of plants with many trees that are more than a hundred years old.[15][16][17]
The garden adjoins one of the towers erected by the founder of Bangalore, Kempe Gowda. The park has some rare species of plants brought from Persia, Afghanistan and France. With an intricate watering system for irrigation, this garden is aesthetically designed, with lawns, flowerbeds, lotus pools and fountains. Most of the centuries-old trees are labelled for easy identification. The Lalbagh Rock, one of the most ancient rock formations on earth, dating back to 3,000 million years, is another attraction that attracts the crowds.[16]
Gates[edit]
Lalbagh has four gates. The eastern gate is situated near Siddapura Circle (K.H Circle - K.H Double Road) and one can enter this gate and enjoy the sylvan atmosphere of the garden. The northwestern wall adjoins Krumbiegal Road named after G.H. Krumbiegal, the last pre-Independence Superintendent.
The western gate has a wide road with Jayanagar, Bangalore close by. The southern gate is often referred to as a small gate and opens near Ashoka pillar. The northern gate is a fairly wide and big road leading to the Glass House and serves as the primary entrance.[3]
Tourism and eco-development[edit]
Flower shows are conducted every year during the week of Republic day and Independence day, to educate people about the variety of flora and develop public interest in plant conservation and cultivation.[18] In August 2022, on the occasion of 75th Independence Day, flower show was conducted in the honour of Rajkumar and Puneeth Rajkumar depicting their life journey. It was attended by 8.34 lakh people.[19]
A bonsai garden has been added in 2002. Apart from this, there is a Topiary Garden, Rose Garden and Lotus Garden inside Lalbagh.[citation needed]
An artificial waterfall has been commissioned in 2017 at the far eastern edge of the lake.[20]
Lalbagh is a good place for bird watching both in the lake and on the ground.[citation needed]
Lalbagh also has a "Garden centre" where citizens can buy ornamental plants. This is managed by Nursery Men's Cooperative society.[21]
A geological monument for the peninsular gneiss formation is also a tourist attraction at the gardens. This monument has been designated by the Geological Survey of India on the Lalbagh hill which is made up of 3,000 million-year-old peninsular gneissic rocks. One of the four cardinal towers erected by Kempegowda II, also a major tourist attraction, is seen above this hillock. This tower gives a view of Bangalore from the top.[22][23]
Lalbagh management and public protests[edit]
The Lalbagh botanical gardens is managed by the Department of Horticulture and is no longer maintained as a botanical garden and is not a member of the Botanic Gardens Conservation International.[24] With an increasing pressure to serve as a park and social space, much of the garden has been converted into walking paths and lawns. Morning walkers throng Lalbagh every morning. Many tree have been trimmed or cut down to make way for public amenities or due to perceptions that falling branches may threaten visitors.[25] A part of the garden was taken over and many trees cut down amid protests for construction of the Lalbagh Metro Station as part of the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. Entry fees of INR 25 with a camera fee of INR 60 have also been a point of contention.[26] There have been repeated proposals to build various recreational amenities such as rock gardens, fountains and boating facilities. Some of these proposals of the management have been halted in the past due protests from enlightened public who have pointed out the impacts these have on the environment.[27]
Connectivity[edit]
Lalbagh metro station connects with the Greenline of Namma Metro.[28]
Lalbagh is also connected by Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation buses from Kempegowda Bus Station/Shivaji Nagar. All buses towards Jayanagar/Banashankari areas pass through one of the four gates of Lalbagh.[citation needed]
Preservation Act, 1979[edit]
The Preservation Act, 1979 passed by the Government of Karnataka to preserve the uniqueness of the park is under the provision of Karnataka Government Park (Preservation) Act, 1975, which states:
Accordingly, it is directed that neither any land should be granted to nor any further constructions be permitted whether temporary or permanent by any organization or individuals in the Cubbon Park and Lalbagh areas except the constructions taken up by the Horticulture Department in furtherance of the objectives of the department.[29]
Gallery[edit]
Lalbagh Gallery
Lalbagh or Lalbagh Botanical Gardens is a well known botanical garden in southern Bangalore, India.
Kempegowda tower
Side view of Glass House
Interior view of the Glass house
Largest known Bombax malabaricum,[6]: 23  'red silk-cotton' or 'kapok' specimen, (sometimes listed as Ceiba pentandra) located in Lalbagh
Evening View of the Lake
A Japanese decorative monument found in Lalbagh
Lalbagh Lake pathway
A statue of Sri Chamarajendra Wodeyar, ex-ruler of Mysore at Lalbagh. He also sponsored the famous journey of Swami Vivekananda to Chicago in 1893.
A view of lake at Lalbagh
Lawn inside Lalbagh
Lotus Pond

Look for Mahatma Gandhi (MG) Road on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Mahatma Gandhi (MG) Road in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Mahatma Gandhi (MG) Road" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Phoenix Marketcity is the name of several shopping malls developed by The Phoenix Mills Co. Ltd. of India, including:
Phoenix Marketcity (Bangalore)
Phoenix Marketcity (Chennai)
Phoenix Marketcity (Mumbai)
Phoenix Marketcity (Pune)
This article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names).
If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.
Look for Tipu Sultan Fort and Palace - Bangalore KR Market on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Tipu Sultan Fort and Palace - Bangalore KR Market in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Tipu Sultan Fort and Palace - Bangalore KR Market" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "UB City" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
UB City
Location within Karnataka
General information
Type Business District
Location Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Coordinates 12°58′18.30″N 77°35′45.00″E
Construction started 2004
Completed 2008
Owner Vijay Mallya
Management United Breweries
Height
Roof 123 m (404 ft) (UB Tower)[1]
Technical details
Floor count 20 (UB Tower/Concorde)
Floor area 950,000 sq ft (88,000 m2)
Design and construction
Architect(s) Thomas Associates, Bengaluru
Main contractor Prestige Group
UB City is a business district in Bengaluru, India. It consists of 6 blocks with a total built up area of over 16 lakh sq ft.[2] Pioneered by the UB Group in Joint Venture with Prestige Group,[3] it is built on 13 acres (53,000 m2) of land and hosts 1,000,000 sq ft (93,000 m2) of high-end commercial, retail and service apartment space.[4]
Location[5][edit]
One of the towers of UB city, as seen in the night.
Centrally located in the Bengaluru CBD (Central Business District), on the corner of Kasturba road and Vittal Mallya Road, it is just 1.8 km (1.1 mi) from M.G. Road - Brigade road junction and right opposite Cubbon Park now officially renamed Sri Chamarajendra Park.
The project[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
UB City has four towers.[6] UB City houses the offices of many corporates under one roof - UB Tower. It has an elevated roof top helipad which provides a five-minute aerial commute to the Kempegowda International Airport. UB City The Collection houses the most luxurious 'global' brands from many business houses across India including Reliance Group, Aditya Birla Group etc.
Gallery[edit]
UB City
UB City at night
UB Tower
Canberra Tower UB City Bangalore
Building in UB City
UB City Entrance

Look for Vidhana Soudha and Attara Kacheri on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Vidhana Soudha and Attara Kacheri in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Vidhana Soudha and Attara Kacheri" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
hide
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article needs additional citations for verification.
(December 2012)
This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. (June 2021)
Visvesvaraya Industrial & Technological Museum
Visvesvaraya Industrial & Technological Museum
Location in the Map of Bangalore
Established 14 July 1962
Location Kasturba road, Bangalore, India
Coordinates 12.975100°N 77.596400°E
Type Science museum
Visitors 1 million+[citation needed]
Director K.A.Sadhana
Curator Manash Bagchi, Jyoti Mehra, Navaram Kumar, Shaik Rafi,Gantla Suresh
Website Official website
The Visvesvaraya Industrial and Technological Museum (VITM), Bangalore, India, a constituent unit of the National Council of Science Museums (NCSM), Ministry of Culture, Government of India, was established in memory of Sir M. Visvesvaraya. The 4,000 m2 (43,000 sq ft) building was constructed in Cubbon Park, and was inaugurated by the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, on July 14, 1962. The museum displays industrial products, scientific models and engines.
History[edit]
Honoring Sir M. Visvesvaraya, the All India Manufacturers Organization and Mysore State Board decided to create a science and technology museum in Bangalore. The foundation stone was laid by Shri B. D. Jatti, Chief Minister of Mysore, on 15 September 1958. The Visvesvaraya Industrial Museum Society (VIMS) came to be registered as the nodal agency in order to pool resources from various industrial houses. It was inaugurated by the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, on July 14, 1962.[1]
The first exhibition, 'Electricity', was opened to the public on July 27, 1965.[2]
In the year 1970, VITM launched the Mobile/Moving Science Exhibition (MSE) with 24 participatory exhibits mounted on a bus. The MSE Bus travels throughout Southern India.
In 1978, many science museums, including VITM, parted from CSIR and were brought under a newly formed society registered on 4 April 1978 as National Council of Science Museums (NCSM). In 1979 an extension was added to the building, increasing the total area of the museum to 6,900 m2 (74,000 sq ft).
NCSM set up three additional science centers at Gulbarga (Karnataka) in 1984, Tirunelveli (Tamil Nadu) in 1987, Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh)in 1993 and at Kozhikode, Kerala in 1997, which are functioning under the direct administrative control of VITM. Thus, VITM has become the southern zone headquarters of NCSM.
The museum attracts nearly one million visitors a year,[2] and is open on all days (except Deepavali and Ganesha Chathurthi) from 09:30 to 18:00.
Exhibition galleries[edit]
Engine Hall exhibits engines of various cars, machines used in industry, a jet aircraft engine, and other mechanical devices.
Through engaging exhibitions, the How Things Work gallery aims to illustrate how machines operate. The pulley system, gears, various motion-transfer mechanisms, levers, inclined planes, and screws that reduce effort are all included as exhibits. The use of these straightforward devices in everyday life is covered in a separate section.
The Fun Science gallery that displays exhibits on the science of sound, optics, fluids, math and perception.
The Electro Technic Gallery contains interactive electrical exhibits which work on the basic principles of electricity, electronics and communication. A renovated version of the Electro Technic gallery was opened to public on 8 April 2010. This gallery exhibits the classical experiments like Oersted's experiment, Barlow's wheel, and Faraday's ring. A demonstration on electrostatics, which includes a Tesla coil and a Van de Graaff generator is on display.
The Space – Emerging Technology in the Service of Mankind gallery showcases the achievements of the Indian Space Program. It was inaugurated on 19 June 1999. The Gallery was renovated with guidance of Indian Space Research Organization and reopened as Space Technology on 28 November 2017 by A. S. Kiran Kumar and Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan. It is the first Science Gallery in India dedicated to Space and Space Technology.
The Biotechnological Revolution hall has exhibits on the basics of biotechnology and its applications, including human genome sequencing. It opened on 4 January 2003. This exhibition has been renovated with new interactive exhibits and displays. This new-look exhibition was opened to public as 'Biotechnology' Gallery on 15 February 2021.
The BEL Hall of Electronics was inaugurated on 29 June 2004 in collaboration with Bharat Electronics Ltd (BEL). This gallery has exhibits on the basic principles of electronics and information technology.
The 'Science for Kids' gallery was inaugurated on 19 April 2019. There are exhibits on Our Senses, about animals, colours, light, sound etc. apart from interactive toys. There is an exhibit where kids can take photos of themselves with life-size animal models. 'Mirror maze' is another attraction in this gallery.
The Dinosaur Alive exhibit has a moving replica of a Spinosaurus. This pneumatically-operated dinosaur can move its head, hands and tail and roll its eyes at the visitors.
The Science on a Sphere facility was opened on 28 July 2014, in celebration of the golden jubilee of VITM.
The Wright Brothers exhibit, also added in 2014, includes a 1:1 scale model of the Wright Brothers’ Flyer, fabricated in-house, and a flight simulator.
In addition to these exhibits, the museum includes a science show hall, a 3D theatre, a 250-seat auditorium, a telemedicine facility, an 11' Celestron telescope with GPS, and a cafeteria.
VITM has developed travelling exhibitions including The World of Astronomical Observatories, The Life and Work of Sir C. V. Raman, Nanotechnology, and The Life and Work of Sir M Visvesvaraya. VITM also hosts, on a regular basis, travelling exhibitions that are developed by other units of NCSM such as Science of Sports, Giants from the Backyard, Chemistry, Disaster - Preparing for the Worst, and Radiations Around Us.
Gallery[edit]
Visvesvaraya Museum entrance
Engine Hall
Steam Locomotive
Steam-powered engine
J. J. Thomson room
HF-24 Marut - Indian built aircraft
Electricity model
Electromagnet model
Diesel engine
Early aircraft engine
Archimedes screw
Steam engine
Animated Dinosaur
The Wright Brothers' Flyer Simulator
Wright Brothers' Aeroplane

Look for Wonderla Amusement Park on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Wonderla Amusement Park in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Wonderla Amusement Park" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Website https://www.aazp.in/
Arignar Anna Zoological Park (abbreviated AAZP), also known as the Vandalur Zoo, is a zoological garden located in Vandalur, to southwest of Chennai, Tamil Nadu, about 31 kilometres (19 mi) from the Chennai Central and 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) from Chennai Airport. Established in 1855, it is the second public zoo in India.[8] It is affiliated with the Central Zoo Authority of India.[9] Spread over an area of 602 hectares (1,490 acres), including a 92.45-hectare (228.4-acre) rescue and rehabilitation centre. The zoo houses 2,553 species of flora and fauna across 1,265 acres (512 ha). As of 2012 the park houses around 1,500 wild species, including 46 endangered species, in its 160 enclosures.[10] As of 2010, there were about 47 species of mammals, 63 species of birds, 31 species of reptiles, 5 species of amphibians, 28 species of fishes, and 10 species of insects in the park.[11] The park, with an objective to be a repository of the state's fauna, is credited with being the second wildlife sanctuary in Tamil Nadu after Mudumalai National Park.[12]
History[edit]
Portrait of Edward Balfour at the Madras Museum
In 1854, the city's first zoo began in the Pantheon (museum) complex with a cheetah and a tiger.[13] This attracted people from distant places and Edward Green Balfour, the then director of the Government Central Museum at Madras, persuaded the Nawab of the Carnatic to donate his entire animal collection to the museum.[14] This attracted large crowds and became the nucleus of the Madras Zoo, which was founded in 1855. Although Balfour started the zoo on the museum premises, a year later it had over 300 animals, including mammals, birds and reptiles.[14] It was later transferred to the Madras Corporation and shifted to People's Park near Chennai Central railway station at Park Town in 1861, as it was growing. The municipal zoological garden occupied one end of the 116-acre (47 ha) park and was open free to the public.[15][16]
By 1975, the zoo could no longer expand, and it had to be moved out of the city because of space constraints and increased noise pollution due to the city's high-density traffic. Hence it was planned in 1976 to maintain the animals in the zoo in good simulated conditions. In 1976, the Tamil Nadu Forest Department set aside 1,265 acres (512 ha) in the Vandalur Reserve Forest on the outskirts of the city to build the current zoo, which is the largest zoological garden in India and the Indian Subcontinent[17][18][19] and one of the largest in the world.[20] Work started in 1979 at an initial cost of ₹ 75 million, and the zoo in its new premises was officially opened to public on 24 July 1985 by the then chief minister of Tamil Nadu M. G. Ramachandran, when most of the works were completed. In the beginning, the area was nothing more than a scrub jungle, with practically no tree cover. The zoo authorities and people from surrounding villages collected seeds of different trees from neighbouring areas and afforested the zoo area.[16] In 2001, 92.45 hectares (228.4 acres) of land next to the park was acquired to build a rescue and rehabilitation centre for confiscated and abandoned wild animals, increasing the park's size to 602 hectares (1,490 acres).
In 1955, the zoo held the first All-India Zoo Superintendents Conference, as part of the centenary celebrations.[21] The zoo is named after Tamil politician Annadurai commonly called as Aringar Annadurai.
Objectives, organisational structure, and revenue generation[edit]
Chimpanzee in zoo
Sloth bears in their near-natural habitat in the zoo
An elephant in its natural environment
The main objectives of the park are ex-situ propagation of critically endangered species to prevent their extinction, wildlife education and interpretation aimed at a wider public appreciation of wildlife, and wildlife research to promote wildlife conservation and management.[22][23]
The overall management of the zoo is vested in the director of the park. The director is also the member secretary of the Zoo Authority of Tamil Nadu (formed under Tamil Nadu Society Act), which started functioning from 1 April 2005, and comprises the following members:
The Secretary to Government, Environment and Forest Department (Chairman)
The Secretary to Government, Finance Department (Member)
The Secretary to Government, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Department (Member)
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Tamil Nadu (Member)
Vice-Chancellor, Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Member)
Director, Department of Environment (Member)
Commissioner, Tourism Department (Member)
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden, Tamil Nadu (Member)
Chief Conservator of Forests and Director, AAZP (Member Secretary)
The Government of Tamil Nadu provides funds for paying the zoo staff and maintenance of zoo vehicles. Other expenditures, such as maintenance of animal enclosures, feed for animals, animal health care, maintenance of zoo, drainage, water, electricity and maintenance of battery-operated vehicles, are met from the income generated by the zoo, chiefly by means of the entry fee. Income is also generated from battery-operated vehicle (BOV) charges, elephant rides, toilets lease, bicycle charges from TI cycles, the leased parking area and food and beverages outlets such as Hotel Tamil Nadu, Aavin, and TANTEA. The yearly budget of the park for its developmental and maintenance work is approved by the governing board.
The functions of the zoo are carried out by several departments, namely, administration, animal welfare, commissary (store), transport, research, education and awareness, veterinary, horticulture, security and sanitation. There are currently about 262 full-time staff against a sanctioned strength of 300, including forest rangers, wildlife keepers, biologists and veterinary doctors.[24]
The director in the rank of chief conservator of forests, supported by one additional director, one deputy director, and two assistant directors, heads the park. Other staff include 27 ministerial staff, 39 field staff (including drivers) and 172 permanent workers under various categories. In addition to the regular staff, the park has also employed contract labourers. The veterinary department is headed by one veterinary officer and two veterinary assistant surgeons with two veterinary attendants. The task of education, interpretation, and research is executed by three biologists of the park.
Location and boundaries[edit]
The entrance to the zoological park
The park is located at Vandalur in the south-western part of the Chennai Metropolitan Area, about 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) from Tambaram, 4 km from Mudichur 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) and about 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) from Chennai Airport. The whole of the park and the proposed night safari zone lie within the Vandalur Reserve Forest area located immediately to the southwest of Tambaram Air Force Station. The eastern and western sides of the park are bordered by Hassan and Otteri lakes, respectively. The main entrance of the zoo lies on the eastern side of the Chennai–Trichy Highway (Grand Southern Trunk Road), also known as the Grand Southern Trunk (GST) Road, near its intersection with the Vandalur–Kelambakkam Road. The lion safari range lies in the north-eastern side of the park, pervading into the reserve forest area, and the rescue and rehabilitation centre and the proposed night safari zone are located at the southern side across the Vandalur–Kelambakkam Road. The Vandalur railway station of the Chennai suburban railway network is located at the north-western side, about 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) from the main entrance of the park.[4] To reach this Arignar Anna Zoological Park, buses are available from all the parts of the Chennai. The Vandalur Railway station is at a distance of about 1Km from the main entrance from the Park.
show
Areas around the zoo
Environment[edit]
A walkway at the zoological gardens
Chitals in the free-range zone
The slope at the walkthrough aviary
The zoo is located within the Vandalur Reserve Forest area.[25] The zoo's ecosystem consists of dry deciduous and dry evergreen scrub forest vegetation of the Eastern Ghats, a degraded forest consisting of mostly thorny bushes, receiving an average annual rainfall of 1,400 millimetres (55 in) and an average annual temperature of 26 °C (79 °F).[26] The terrain is a gentle undulating one[22] ranging in altitude from 10 to 100 metres (33 to 328 ft) with an average elevation of 50 metres (160 ft) above sea level.[26] The park was designed to keep the natural vegetation of the area intact except where enclosures, roads, and structures had to be constructed. Originally a sparse scrub forest invaded by weeds, consisting of species such as Carissa sp., Gmelina sp., Eugenia sp., Acacia sp., Instia sp. and a few other dry evergreen forest species, the park's vegetation was gradually enriched by planting dry evergreen species.[26] The entire campus has been fortified by means of a compound wall,[27] preventing any biotic interference in the park and allowing the natural growth of vegetation, which give the park the look of a natural forest. The park is built based on the 'open zoo' concept. The exhibits were originally based on taxonomic and geographical distribution of the species, but have now been replaced by ecological niches and habitats. The order of priority is local species, followed by regional, national, and international species. The use of moats has made it possible to house predator and prey in extended enclosures that provide a panorama of wildlife. There are over 75 moated enclosures in the park. Enrichments in the form of ladders, climbing materials, etc. are provided for the animals to move around the enclosure freely.[28]
A typical moated enclosure in the zoo
Most of the exhibits in the zoo lie along a circular road covering about 2.5 kilometres (1.6 mi). Smaller mammals and other exhibits are located along three inner roads. The park area is dotted with large open island-type enclosures and chain-link fence, with camouflaged wet and dry moats, hidden walls, and simulated natural environment for the residents of the park.[22]
The remaining area makes up the free-range zone—an open area which makes up the bulk of the park and where animals such as deer and jackals are left to roam free. There are more than 500 deer of different varieties and an equal number of jackals in the free-range zone. In addition, there are four enclosures for deer—each housing about 30 animals.[29] Deer and jackals are found in equal numbers and are known for their fast-breeding ability, especially in their natural environment. The deer–jackal ratio is maintained by the 'natural method of selection'—allowing the stronger ones to prey on the weaker ones—a natural way of balancing the ecological system.
Otteri lake situated on the north-western side within the park premises acts as a roosting ground for a wide array of aquatic migratory birds such as storks, herons, ibises, pelicans and cormorants, making it a bird watchers' paradise. The 7-hectare (17-acre) lake, surrounded by a variety of trees, receives the run-off water from nearly half the area of the park and attracts a large number of migratory birds in October, November, and December. Both terrestrial and aquatic birds of about 70 species congregate here during the season. On average, around 10,000 migratory birds visit the lake each year. About 230 saplings of Barringtonia, a species native to mangrove habitats, have been planted inside the lake to attract more birds.[30]
Exhibits[edit]
Emu in the birds' section
A pair of Bird in Vandalur Zoo
Hippopotamus
The park has 81 enclosures and more than 170 species of mammals, birds and reptiles,[31] The park contains about 138 plant species, including cashew and eucalyptus.[2] The dense vegetation of the park supports about 56 species of butterfly.[26]
Animals at the park includes:
Financial Year Numbers Mammals Birds Reptiles Amphibians Fish Total
2005 - 06 [32] Species 46 62 29 5 21 163
Animals 430 534 351 72 265 1657
2011 - 12 [32] Species 44 70 29 NA NA 143
Animals 394 216 280 NA NA 1390
2012 - 13 [33] Species 45 67 29 NA NA 141
Animals 391 764 279 NA NA 1434
2013 - 14 Species 46 79 33 NA NA 158
Animals 407 773 318 NA NA 1498
2014 - 15 Species 46 81 33 NA NA 160
Animals 445 1035 351 NA NA 1841
2015 - 16 Species 43 92 35 NA NA 170
Animals 451 1312 379 NA NA 2142
2016 - 17 Species 46 94 33 NA NA 173
Animals 450 1511 417 NA NA 2378
2017 - 18 Species 47 94 34 NA NA 175
Animals 461 1507 411 NA NA 2379
2018 - 19 Species 46 90 35 NA NA 171
Animals 475 1754 415 NA NA 2644
show
List of animals
Safaris
Elephants being fed
One of the yards within the lion safari area
As part of the park's development plan, safari parks for lions and deer have been created on a hilly terrain covering an area of 70 hectares (170 acres), enabling the visitors to see the animals in their natural habitats.
The lion park has been developed in an area of 30 hectares (74 acres) at a cost of about ₹ 2.358 million and is operational since October 1990 providing the visitors a 15-min drive into the safari. The safari contains 15 lions which are involved in a breeding programme.[34] As the lions started forming groups according to their instincts and compatibility, the zoo authorities apportioned two small areas within the existing safari area in 2012, work on which started in January 2012 at a cost of ₹ 600,000, enabling the visitors to see one pride in the open forest area and the other two in the newly created fenced yards. These enclosures had been created on a 160-sq m area, with facilities such as rest shed and water trough. Each pride consists of three to four animals.[35]
The deer park was opened in 2008. It covers 35 hectares (86 acres)[36] and is home to more than 100 animals including sambar and spotted deer.
An elephant safari was introduced in the zoo in the summer of 2008, providing a ride on elephants for a tour around the zoo.[37][38] The park is the only place after Mudumalai in the Nilgiris that organises elephant safari rides in the state. There are 3 elephants in the park and 2 more have been brought from Mudumalai to start the safari.[39]
The park authorities plan to create a new gaur safari in 2011 in part of the current lion safari area. The lion safari has two geographical regions—hilly and plains. At present, the lions move around in the plains region (about 12 hectares (30 acres) of the 30-hectare (74-acre) total area) and are not allowed into the hilly region. The proposed gaur safari would be created on the 18 hectares (44 acres) of the hilly terrain.[40] In 2007, a night safari project in the park was promoted[41][42][43] with two components, namely, an animal exhibit area and an entertainment area. The night safari was being established for providing opportunity to observe the natural wildlife behaviour and activities in the night hours. Initially, it was expected to be implemented during 2010–11 at a cost of ₹ 40.2 million.[44][45] With the initially allocated sum, the zoo authorities completed construction of enclosures for tigers, elephants, gaur, sloth bears, spotted deer and sambar and a large number of saplings was raised to be planted around the night safari area. Nearly ₹ 78.7 million was spent on construction of the enclosures, surveying the lands, perimeter wall and laying circular roads for the night safari. With delay in getting funds from the Union Ministry, the project was put on hold and the zoo prepared another proposal for ₹ 820 million for night safari in July 2011. However, this too was deferred by the state government.[46][47]
Sanctuary aviaries
The entrance of the walkthrough aviary
Two aviaries at the zoo were designed to imitate specific bird sanctuaries in Tamil Nadu. The Point Calimere Aviary represents a sanctuary on a bay on the Coromandel Coast of the District of Nagapattinam, where migratory birds including flamingos, seagulls, teals, storks and herons can be seen between October and February every year. These species can be seen year-round in this aviary, where flamingos can feed in the shallows while seagulls swim in deeper water. The aviary has a small island (about 30 square metres (320 sq ft)) with bushy vegetation, and water covering about 110 square metres (1,200 sq ft). The Vedanthangal Sanctuary Aviary represents a sanctuary located in the district of Kanchipuram. It is planted with gum arabic tree, bamboo and other tree species which offer convenient places for birds to rest. Birds such as white ibis, painted stork, night heron and grey heron are found here, and baskets have been provided to facilitate breeding.[2][48]
Walk-through aviary
The terrestrial aviary was opened in 1992, but was closed within a few years due to maintenance issues. It was renovated and reopened in 2010 as the Bio Centre. This 1.5-acre (0.61 ha)[49] walk-through aviary cost about ₹ 2 million and is located on a slope behind the tiger house (12.8823035°N 80.0913191°E).[50] The aviary is the biggest such facility in a zoo in the country.[51] The facility features fifteen-metre-tall fences to facilitate free flight of birds within the area. The aviary is home to about 245 birds of different species including Alexandrine parakeet, rose-ringed parakeet, blue rock pigeon, common myna, Indian koel, common babbler, white-browed bulbul, francolin, red-vented bulbul, red-whiskered bulbul, wagtail, pipit, orange-headed thrush, red-wattled lapwing, little brown dove and spotted dove.[50]
Walkthrough aviary at the zoo, located on a slope behind the tiger enclosure
The height of the aviary ranges from 5 metres (16 ft) at the top of the slope to 12 metres (39 ft) at the bottom, with the chain link 'roof' sloping downward from west to east. The aviary is surrounded by a 1-metre (3 ft 3 in) wall, and the four sides above this are covered with steel and blue-coloured nylon net in order to provide an open-sky effect. The ground is floored by tiled footpath lawned with Korean grass to maintain the humidity level. The moist deciduous habitat supports 22 tree and shrub species.[52][53][54] Fruit-bearing trees such as mango, pomegranate, guava, sapota (Sapodilla), jamoon, Singapore cherry and chillies have been planted for the benefit of fruit-eating birds. Heaps of dry leaves, dung, dry wood waste and rotten fruits have been provided for insect-eating birds. The zoo has also set up a mud bath facility for the birds. Palm trees with holes have been planted to facilitate natural breeding of parakeets, and heaps of stones have been provided for ground-nesting birds. The aviary also has fountains and water bodies for the birds.[50] As of 2018, the zoo had about 89 species of birds, amounting to 1,604 individuals, of which 61 were native varieties and 28 were exotic breeds.[51]
Butterfly house
The butterfly house, constructed at a cost of ₹ 6 million, has more than 25 host plants and landscaped habitats, such as bushes, lianas, streams, waterfall and rock-gardens, that attract many species of butterflies such as the common Mormon, crimson rose, mottled emigrant, blue tiger, evening brown and lime butterfly. A network of ponds interconnected by streams maintains humidity in the area. The park covers an area of 5 acres.[55] The butterfly garden with an insect museum at the entrance is set up by the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore.[56] The insect museum has been planned with an exhibit area comprising insect exhibits representing the most common Indian species of all orders of insects both in the form of preserved specimens and in the form of photographs.[57]
Birds enclosure at the zoo
White stork at the aviary
Reptile house/serpentarium
The reptile house or the serpentarium is built, at the cost of ₹ 0.4 million,[58] in a twining snake-like model with entrance and exit points in the snake's mouth and tail, respectively. The house was opened to public in the year 1989 and has 24 enclosures exhibiting 4 species of poisonous and 10 species of non-poisonous snakes. It contains a total of 104 snakes, including 41 Indian pythons, 21 Burmese pythons and four cobras.[59] The park has initiated controlled breeding programme for Indian rock python. Each vivarium has been renovated by changing substratum and providing perch and hide outs. The top of the opening in RCC roof is closed with transparent acrylic sheet to avoid rain and the walled enclosure enables the snake to exhibit all natural behaviours. The king cobra is scientifically kept and maintained in constant temperature by providing air conditioning and hot spot.
Amphibian house
The park stands first in the country for establishing an amphibian captive facility, and it is the only zoo in the country to have amphibians on display.[60] Locally available species such as Indian tree frog (Polypedates maculatus), common Indian toad (Bufo melanasticus), Indian bull frog (Rana tigirina), Indian cricket frog (Limnonectus limnocharis) and Indian pond frog (Euphlyctis cyanophlyctis) are exhibited at the Amphibian Centre. A water-recycling system has been introduced to keep the house clean, and plants have been planted inside each tank to add lushness.
Crocodile enclosure
Tiger's enclosure
The park houses many species of crocodiles such as the gharial,[61] the mugger crocodile, the saltwater crocodile and the spectacled caiman.[62][63] The eight enclaves for crocodiles comprise about 220 individuals, including 125 adult specimens belonging to the six varieties. This includes two pairs of adult fresh water crocodiles. Many of the species also breed here.[64][65][66]
Painted storks at the zoo
Primate house
The primate house includes some unique endangered primate species like the lion-tailed macaque, Nilgiri langur and chimpanzee. The park is also the National Studbook Keeper for the endangered lion-tailed macaque, nominated by the CZA.[67][68] With the successful execution of the Co-ordinated Captive Breeding Programme (CCBP), the park accounts for around 36 percent of lion-tailed macaques in the country's zoos as of 2011.[69]
World of nocturnal animals
The nocturnal animals section houses six species. The biological rhythm and cycle of the animals has been modified so that they are active during the daytime and sleep during the nighttime.
Shark-shaped aquarium in the zoo
Small mammals house
The newly constructed Small Mammals House has animals such as the Indian giant squirrel and the black giant squirrel. The zoo also houses many small carnivores and animals of the Western Ghats.
Aquarium
The shark-modelled aquarium, with its entrance and exit points in the form of gills of the shark, is set amidst a pond and houses 31 species of fresh-water fishes. The pond surrounding the aquarium too has different varieties of fishes.
There are 28 types, including angel fish, black ghost, electric yellow lab, glass fish, giant catfish, oscar fish, tiger barb, rykin gold fish, neon tetra, and zebra danio.
Other sections
Other sections in the zoo include the prey–predator concept enclosures (tiger–sambar), Prehistoric Animal Park with life-size models of prehistoric animals and insectarium complex, apart from an interpretation centre, zoo school and children's park. The zoo school, opened in 2000, has formulated conservation, education and awareness programmes for academics and general public that includes teacher training, zoo outreach and volunteers programmes, such as Zoo Club Volunteer Programme and Animal Keepers Training Programme. The zoo also has a library with a collection of wildlife-related books.[22] The library functions twice a week, on Mondays and Fridays.[70]
A panoramic view of Bengal tigers
Captive breeding[edit]
The zoo is among four in the country to have ostriches
Gaur or Indian bison bull
The Central Zoo Authority of India (CZA) has identified the park as coordinating zoo for the breeding programmes for endangered species as per the National Zoo Policy adopted by the Government of India in 1988, which states that the main objective of zoos will be to complement and strengthen national efforts in the conservation of the country's rich biodiversity and that the species which have no chance of survival in the wild would be bred under ex-situ conditions. The park has a high rate of success in captive breeding of lion-tailed macaques.[71] In 2010, the zoo had 22 lion-tailed macaques, from a breeding pair that were brought to the zoo in 1983.[24] The park is also successful in breeding other rare species in captivity, including ostrich,[72] Asian palm civet,[73] Indian gaur,[74] wild dog,[75] Asiatic lion,[76] Nilgiri langur,[77] sangai, hippo,[78][79] Malabar giant squirrel, white tiger,[80][81] Asiatic wolf, panther[82] and bison.[83] The zoo is among four in the country to have an ostrich. The park also undertakes cross-breeding as part of its conservation efforts.[84] The park is also a participating zoo of the CZA for the captive breeding of rock python, Nilgiri langur, lion-tailed macaque, Asiatic lion, wild dog, Asiatic wolf, and gaur.[85] The zoo also promotes exterior conservation—conservation of rare species in their natural habitat—whereby individuals born in the zoo are released in the wild after adequate training, as per the guidelines of the CZA.[25]
Other facilities[edit]
The park has tree-lined paved paths for long treks inside the campus, enabling the visitors to walk 15 to 20 kilometres (9.3 to 12.4 mi) during a visit. Battery-operated vehicles with a range of up to 80 kilometres (50 mi) are available for rent. There are about 9 such vehicles in addition to the 4 battery-operated vans used for the lion safari and 4 diesel-run road rails[86][87] used for going around the zoo, and the approval has been given in 2017 for two more vehicles.[88] Each vehicle can carry 15 to 20 people, and each trip takes about an hour. A trial program of 20 rental bicycles for visitors, including 5 for children, was launched in 2008 as an eco-friendly option intended to reduce demand for the battery-operated cars.[89] An e-bike facility was also inaugurated on 20 February 2010. By the beginning of 2018, plans were on to install 32 CCTV cameras in the zoo.[88]
Refreshment outlets include a snack bar run by the Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation (TTDC),[52] an ice cream parlour and a soft drinks counter—all near the entrance. The park also maintains 16 toilets and nearly two dozen drinking fountains within the premises for the visitors. The zoo is open to public from 8:30 am to 5:30 pm except on Tuesdays, when the zoo carries out weekly maintenance work. All the animals, especially the big cats, are back in their cages after 5.00 pm and most tourists prefer to visit them before going on to the other exhibits.[90] The zoo has a guest house located on Kelambakkam Road.[91]
Electric vehicle (left) and vehicle for lion safari (right) at the zoo.
The zoo is fenced on all sides by means of the perimeter wall. The zoo security is mainly carried out by the forest subordinate staff of rangers, foresters and forest guards along with zoo security staff, who conduct regular patrolling of animal enclosures, stores and other buildings. Night security is carried out under the command of one range officer and other subordinates. The zoo has also employed private security personnel. From 1 December 2010, four persons from a private security service have been deployed along with forest rangers for night patrolling.
In July 2013, ambulance facility, equipped with an oxygen cylinder, pulse monitor, critical care monitor, stretcher, surgical tools, small cages, tranquilizing darts and emergency medicines, for animals inside the premises was inaugurated.[92]
A research and training facility was set up in 2017 at an estimated cost of ₹71.3 million. It will conduct research on subjects such as endangered animals and their reproduction, besides suggesting ways and means to address man–animal conflicts.[93]
Renovation[edit]
One of nine white tigers at the zoo
In February 2011, the zoo began construction of a large new tiger cage at a cost of about ₹ 200,000, and the new cage will be linked to the existing one. The existing enclosure measures 26.64 feet in height, length and width. The new cage will be 13 metres (43 ft) tall at its highest point and 11 metres (36 ft) wide, enough for four adult tigers at a time. It will have separate entries for the animal keeper and the animals. Illuminated by solar-powered lights, it will have a sloping roof and good ventilation.[94] There are 18 tigers in the zoo, 9 of which are white tigers.[95]
For the first time since the shifting of the zoo from Park Town in 1979, the park underwent a major renovation in 2011, costing ₹ 32.5 million.[96] The renovated entrance was inaugurated by the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, J. Jayalalithaa, on 19 June 2012. The new 6-m wide entrance features 250-m long, 2.7-m high brick-and-granite wall, with 43 mural relief sculptures representing different animals in the zoo and a 12-m fenced lawn. The main entrance tower is 10.5 m tall, with two adorning structures 8.5 m each on either side.[97] Other additions include huge lawns covering nearly 300 m on both sides of the entrance, tiled floors, an interpretation centre (similar to the one at the Vedanthangal Bird Sanctuary) with LED displays at the entrance, additional ticket counters, and a souvenir shop selling memorabilia like T-shirts and artefacts showcasing the flora and fauna of the sub-continent. The new entrance also features 20 computerised ticket counters to handle huge crowds.[96]
The zoo authorities are in the process of restoring and renovating the approach road to Otteri lake, located inside the zoo. Post-monsoon, the lake attracts many migratory birds, and the lake could act as an ideal spot to view birds at close quarters. Hence, a bird's viewpoint is being built to encourage bird watching.[98]
Visitors[edit]
During April 2010–March 2011, the zoo received nearly 1,810,846 visitors, as against 1,187,904 visitors in 2006–2007.[99] In November 2010, the total revenue was ₹ 46.9 million, against ₹ 40.2 million during October 2009.[28][100] There has been an increase of more than 200,000 visitors in 2010 compared to 2009, and the park had recorded a 21 percent increase in the number of visitors.[101][102][103] The number of visitors raises to the peak on the Kaanum Pongal day, a day in the festival season of mid-January, when the visitor count goes up to 63,000 on a single day. About 57,000 visitors arrived on the Kannum Pongal day of 2009, resulting in revenue of ₹ 1.015 million.[104] It was 56,555 in 2010 and 57,217 in 2011. The all-time record of 63,000 visitors a day was registered on the Kannum Pongal day of 2012, resulting in revenue of ₹ 1.1 million.[105] Less footfall in 2015-16 due to floods in November and December 2015. Less footfall in 2016-17 due to closure of zoo for two months (12.12.2016 to 09.02.2017) after cyclone Vardah.
One of the two ticket counters at the entrance plaza
The number of visitors to the zoo is steadily growing by an estimated 10 to 15 percent every year.[98] The visitor statistics and the revenue generated over the past years are listed below:
Year Total number of visitors Total revenue (in Indian rupees)
2002-2003 711,589 8,280,254.50
2003-2004 700,963 11,070,930.00
2004-2005 668,026 11,135,581.00
2005-2006 848,823 14,446,000.00
2006-2007 1,187,904 20,251,945.00
2007-2008 1,447,992 25,074,288.00
2008-2009 1,646,129 30,387,902.00
2009-2010 1,604,216 40,286,000.00
2010-2011 1,810,846 46,997,710.00
2011-2012 2,002,545 42,316,857.00
2012-2013 2,212,131 67,395,062.00
2013-2014 2,375,053 74,751,469.00
2014-2015 2,382,625 79,213,099.00
2015-2016 2,198,794 94,691,728.00
2016-2017 1,779,501 84,982,456.00
2017-2018 1,824,624 118,724,220.00
2018-2019 2,026,799 126,416,725.00
The zoo management has started to live stream all the animals and birds present in the zoo. To watch the live streaming, zoo management has created a separate website for the visitors who are not able to visit the zoological park.[106]
Programmes and activities[edit]
Wild migratory birds visit every season
The park has a zoo club, comprising college students, which was formed in 1997. The club helps keep the premises clean, and the members also conduct educational programmes and carry out patrols.[107]
Following the death of a llama at the park after swallowing a plastic bag, plastic materials have been banned inside the park premises. Visitors are frisked at the entrance to restrict all plastic goods.[108] The members of the zoo club are 98 percent successful in controlling the entry of plastic materials inside the park. The zoo also plans to introduce 'Friends of the Zoo' programme in line with the National Zoo Policy, prepared by the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests in 1998.
The park launched a zoo newsletter in 2000 to serve as a source of current news and developments in the park. Efforts are being made to publish the newsletter at regular intervals.
From 22 to 24 September 2000, the park conducted a workshop for keeping and breeding amphibians in captivity for the first time in India.
The zoo performed the world's first non-invasive birth-control surgery on mugger crocodiles
The park, along with the Chennai Snake Park, Madras Crocodile Bank and the Mysore Zoo, is slated to become a nodal point for captive breeding of endangered pythons in the country, especially the Indian rock python (Python molurus) and reticulated python (Python reticulatus).[109]
Sambar deer at the Park
In 2007, the zoo started to construct a separate breeding enclosure for the lion-tailed macaque, proposing to bring under Foreign Animal Exchange Programme. The enclosure was built at a cost of ₹ 1.6 million at a silent, remote place in the park to provide a natural habitat for the animals and to ensure breeding. The total enclosure measures about 3,000 sq m, including three rooms with about 250 sq ft. Three pairs of macaque could be kept in these rooms. The habitat is planted with fruit-bearing trees, including gooseberry and mangoes.[110]
In July 2008, the world's first non-invasive birth control surgery on mugger crocodiles was performed in the park by the surgeons of the Madras Veterinary College to control breeding and inbreeding.[111]
In September 2008, the park initiated Adopt An Animal, an animal adoption programme,[112] which has seen a few takers so far in the state, with less than 20 sponsors, mostly individuals and companies, coming forward. The first adoption began with adopting a spotted deer, a peacock, two lovebirds and a parrot in June 2009.[113][114] The park has received funds to a tune of ₹ 2.3 million from individuals and organisations for adopting animals between August 2010 and March 2011.[115] The Zoo has also started online adoption[116] of animals through the website Online Animal Adoption , where in anyone can adopt animals online from the Zoo starting Rs.100.
The park has developed an informative and illustrative guide in collaboration with the Centre for Environment Education (CEE), Ahmedabad, providing zoo ethics and comprehensive information including road map to the animal enclosures and visitor amenities.
In 2012, for the first time in the country, the park adopted 'social grouping' of animals in captivity, where members of same species would be kept together, to showcase how they interact in groups.[117]
In March 2013, a blood transfusion performed on a 10-year-old hyena by a four-member team of doctors in the zoo, marking the first successful blood transfusion done for a wild species in an Indian zoo.[118]
In April 2018, the zoo launched a mobile app to provide information on the zoo, online ticket booking, interactive map providing a virtual tour guide inside the premises, and so forth.[119] Live streaming of animals on the Internet also began in the same period.[120] The mobile App is available on Android and on Apple Store for download. Vandalur Zoo Mobile App
The Zoo School is the body under the Vandalur Zoo which conducts a lot of programs like the Zoo Ambassador Programme, Species Ambassador Programs etc and all the events can be registered online on the website[121]
Vandalur Zoo is celebrating the wildlife week 2022 with a series of events where school students and general public can participate in a list of online and onsite activities at the zoo - List of Wildlife Week 2022 Events
Animal care[edit]
Owing to its vastness and round-the-clock availability of animal medical care facilities, most of the rescued animals in the state, especially elephants, are brought to the park.[122][123] With Chennai serving as a transit point for wildlife smugglers in Southeast Asian countries, the zoo also receives many recovered endangered species for rehabilitation.[124] The three important captive management practices of the zoo that contributed to the longevity of animals include environment enrichment, psychological well-being and animal husbandry and veterinary care. There has been a considerable reduction in the mortality rate of animals in captivity at the park. Between April 2010 and March 2011, only 22 animals were reported dead, of which 9 died due to old age and the remaining owing to other health-related problems and infighting.[125] Incidents of infighting, although rare, have been reported in the park.[126]
Bengal tiger in the zoo
With the guidance provided by the CZA, kraals—fencing of a portion of the moated enclosure—were created in the herbivore enclosures in 2003 in order to isolate and treat sick or wounded animal. Herbivores with physical problems are isolated in the facility to be checked by the vets. One of the corners of the enclosure is chosen mainly to keep visitors away from the treated animals. Kraals have been created in the enclosures of spotted deer, blackbuck, sambar, nilghai, barking deer, hog deer, brow-antlered deer, moufflon and bison. To make the animals get accustomed to the kraal, the feed is kept inside the premises. Apart from treating animals, the kraal also acts as a place for isolating animals in rut. For example, during mating season, males often fight with each other leading to problems for the veterinarians. To overcome this, the males are kept in kraals in isolation from other males. Kraals also help research scholars in observing and recording the movement and other activities of the animal, thus helping with studying their behavioural pattern.[127]
The zoo also has a zoo kitchen, zoo hospital and quarantine facility. Every day, about 190 kg of non-perishable food items, 300 kg of perishable foods, 750 kg of beef and fish, 430 kg of cattle feed and 2,000 kg of fodder are being provided to the zoo inmates. A rat-breeding centre has been constructed near the store house to cater the needs of snakes. The fodder bank raised in the zoo premises fulfils the fodder requirement of the herbivores population in the park. The zoo orchard with trees such as mango, guava, and coconut supplies fruits for the park's daily requirement.
Indian lions
Rescue and rehabilitation centre
With the banning of training and exhibition of five species of animals, namely, lion, tiger, panther, bear and monkey enforced by the Government of India in 1998,[128] a 92.45-hectare (228.4-acre) rescue and rehabilitation centre for animals was established next to the zoo with the assistance of the CZA in 2001. The area was acquired from the research wing of the Tamil Nadu Forest Department in continuity with the fodder bank of the zoo with an assistance of ₹ 14.598 million. The centre provides temporary and long-term care for confiscated and abandoned endangered animals, such as lions and tigers rescued from circuses, and is home to about 32 lions and 7 tigers.[31] It has a capacity to house 40 lions and 20 tigers.[129] It also has a reptile house and an aviary.[130] The park is one of the five zoos in the country identified and funded by the CZA for the rehabilitation of circus animals. The rehabilitation centre is not open to the visitors.[131]
Zoo veterinary hospital
The zoo veterinary hospital is responsible for disease prevention and health care management of the park's captive population. The hospital has a well-equipped operation theatre, in-patient ward, radiology unit, laboratory, clinical room, pathology room, quarantine facilities and convalescent yard fully functional to cater the needs of complete animal health care.[31] It also includes a modern diagnostic laboratory with facility for periodic coprological examination, identification of causative organism, antibiotic sensitivity, pregnancy diagnosis, haematology, serology and urinalysis.
Conservation[edit]
Bengal tiger
Giraffe
Water management
The zoo requires about 600,000 litres (160,000 US gal) of water per day[36] for drinking, bathing animals, cleaning enclosures, and keeping the areas around them cool, much of which comes from the Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board (TWAD). The remainder comes from 13 open wells, 5 borewells and the Otteri lake within the zoo premises. In 2011, the zoo started constructing rainwater harvesting systems, including small bunds and check dams, to store water during the monsoon that would otherwise be lost.[132] Three troughs and a check dam have already been constructed in the safari to help store the natural runoff from the nearby hillock.
Several enclosures, such as that of hyenas, are lit by solar power
Power management
As of 2012, the zoo uses a lone 100-kV generator to meet the power shortage. The zoo has proposed to buy another 100-kV generator at a cost of ₹ 800,000.[36]
In 2011, to save power and increase safety, solar powered lights were installed in 14 enclosures at the park at a cost of ₹ 200,000. The lion safari (old and new) and enclosures for white tigers, panthers, bears, hyenas, chimpanzee, a pair of lions, jackal, wild dog, owl, sloth bear, and brown bear are lit by solar power for about three hours every evening. Each system includes a solar panel and a 250-kv battery connected to a 33-volt bulb and can supply power for up to 8 hours.[133]
Heat management
The soaring temperature in Chennai, especially during summer, demands extra care for residents of the zoo. Fortunately, the temperature inside the zoo campus is a couple of degrees lower than outside any time of the year, primarily due to the lush greenery.[108] The park also maintains an exclusive summer management schedule. All animal enclosures have thatched roofs and fresh river sand spread on the floor to make it cooler for the animals. Water is sprinkled on the sand to provide extra cooling. Roofs of water birds' enclosures are covered with coconut leaves and wet gunny bags.[36] Caves that are exposed directly to the sun are put under a shower twice a day. The enclosure for the king cobra has an air conditioner in order to provide an environment similar to its natural habitat as the species cannot withstand the summer heat.[134] For birds, the topmost part of the cage is covered with jute bags, and water is sprinkled three times a day. Based on the temperature, cucumber, buttermilk, apple and banana are also served to herbivores.[135][136] The zoo has also set up sprinklers to help animals beat the summer heat and is planning to set up about 20 more sprinklers at the deer safari.[36]
In 2011, to increase the green cover, the forest department initiated to plant 25,000 saplings in the zoo.[137]
Incidents[edit]
Crocodiles sun-bathing
In January 2002, when a panther from the Vandalur reserve forest entered into the zoo premises, the zoo was closed for over 45 days to facilitate search for the animal. After several attempts, the animal was finally trapped, and it was named after the zoo keeper, Arumugam, who first noticed the feline in the trap cage and alerted his superiors.[138][139][140][141]
The white tiger cub that turned black, with its mother
On 12 November 2007, a 13-ft long reticulated python was found in a ventilator inside the pygmy hippopotamus enclosure in the zoo. According to the zoo officials, the rescued python could have escaped from its enclosure, when it was young, 4 to 5 years ago. When the workers tried to take the reptile, it bit one of the animal keepers, but since it was a non-poisonous one, the animal keeper was not harmed fatally and was provided treatment for the injury. The reptile was feeding on small mammals, roaming freely inside the zoo, which helped it survive without any problem.[142]
On the night of 10 July 2010, three sand boas (Eryx johnii), out of five in the enclosure, were reported stolen from the zoo.[104]
On 2 August 2011, a 17-year-old male gaur named Mani was found gored to death in his enclosure, by a younger male named Vijay and aged 6, allegedly over fight for a mate. The zoo officials reported Mani was the oldest of the herd of gaur living in the zoo, and added that this is an unusual incident. On 20 August 2017, the same gaur Vijay also killed another 20-year-old male named Ratnam.[143]
In January 2011, 50 birds died under dubious circumstances in the park within a month. Later, postmortem report found that they were poisoned.[144]
In September 2011, a nine-feet-long Burmese python was reported missing from its enclosure at the serpentarium. The animal keeper forgot to close the channel connecting the snake's enclosure with an outlet outside with a piece of wood after the weekly clean-up, and the python had managed to crawl out. On 5 December 2011, after about 3 months, the animal was found in the bushes near the enclosure after swallowing a chicken kept near the enclosure as bait.[59]
A three-year-old male white tiger succumbed to injuries suffered during a fight with its potential mate, a nine-year-old royal Bengal tigress, on 7 August 2013. The tigress, also severely injured following the fight. Deep wounds in the brain had resulted in the tiger's death. The incident came as a blow to officials at the Arignar Anna Zoological Park in Vandalur, who have been trying to prevent in-breeding among white tigers and strengthen the species gene through cross breeding. Christened by former Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi in September 2010, the deceased white tiger, Sembian, was paired with a nine-year-old royal Bengal tigress, Sathya, a few months ago.[145] A litter of Dhole puppies were born in December 2021 and was available for viewing for public in an enclosure from June 2022 and this attracts a lot of visitors.[146]
COVID-19 pandemic[edit]
A 9-year-old lioness, named Neela and a 12-year-old lion, named Pathbanathan died due to COVID-19 in the month of June 2021.[147] Out of 15 lions, 11 were tested positive for SARS‑CoV‑2. The zoo sent three set of samples to Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), National Institute of High Security Animal Diseases (NIHSAD) and Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) for genome sequencing.[148] On 6 June 2021, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M. K. Stalin visited the zoo, to review the measures being taken by zoo authorities.[149] The experts from Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (TANUVAS) were consulted to deal the outbreak.[150]
The Future[edit]
Birds at the zoo
A deer in its enclosure
Leopard in its enclosure
In 2012, a wild-life research institute was proposed to be built inside the park at an expense of ₹ 342.4 million. This institute will be further developed in three years with the estimate totaling ₹ 743.7 million, with centres for ecological education and awareness, wildlife forensic research, and herbivores and carnivores field research.[151]
In 2012, a turtle-shaped building was planned at an estimated cost of ₹ 400,000 to house various types of turtles in the park.[152]
In February 2013, Chief Minister Jayalalithaa ordered to establish a wildlife research centre at the Park at a cost of ₹ 271.3 million. The centre will house eight research laboratories,[153] including a nature education and awareness centre, wildlife forensic science research centre, and field research centres for herbivorous and carnivorous animals and will have two scientists, four junior researchers and two assistant veterinary doctors. The centre would cost the government an annual continuing expense of ₹ 2.699 million.[154] The foundation stone for the research centre, which will be located opposite the main campus, was laid on 15 March 2013.[155] The construction work is expected to be completed by mid-2014.[153]
In July 2013, the public works department (PWD) was expected to begin work on a butterfly park in the zoo, an initiative sanctioned in 2001. The park is being constructed at a cost of ₹ 50 million. The caterpillar-shaped park with a landscaped habitat, nectar gardens, a walking bridge, pathways for visitors, breeding and rearing centres, and rock gardens will be built on 2.5 hectares, including the actual built-up area of 2,000 sq ft near the Otteri lake. The park has a network of ponds interconnected by streams to maintain humidity level. The caterpillar design was chosen because the 60-ft-long tube-like structure made of acrylic sheets, which will keep the inside of the building cool by absorbing less heat. The park will have more than 40 Indian species, including the common leopard, blue Mormon, yellow pansy, red Helen, and common Jezebel. Apart from local butterfly species, the park will host at least 80 exotic species of butterflies including the four-barred swordtail from Australia, the common savanna bush brown from South Africa, the Australian painted lady and the Danaid eggfly. The park will have a capacity to accommodate at least 100 persons at any given time and is expected to be ready by September 2013.[156]
In 2013, a forest and wildlife museum was planned at the zoo, for which a budget of ₹ 2 million has been earmarked by the state forest ministry, including ₹ 500,000 for preparing display furniture, ₹ 200,000 for labelling, special light arrangements and fans, and ₹ 1.3 million for the collection and preparation of materials, a herbarium, xylarium, entomological collection, portraits, soil and rock collections and artefacts. The museum will be built near the exit gate on a 2,000 sq ft area. The museum is expected to be completed by the end of 2013–2014 financial year.[157]
In March 2020, a safari world was planned at the zoo at a cost of ₹ 115 million, which would help visitors watch wild animals at close quarters.[158]
Zoo Museum[edit]
The zoo also has a forest museum near the entrance, providing information about insects, plants, minerals, ores, and others.[citation needed]

Look for Besant Nagar Beach on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Besant Nagar Beach in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Besant Nagar Beach" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
"Madras Central" redirects here. For the poem by Vijay Nambisan, see Madras Central (poem).
"Chennai Central" redirects here. For other uses, see Chennai Central (disambiguation).
Chennai Central
Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central Railway Station
Indian Railways and Chennai Suburban Railway station
Main entrance of Chennai Central
General information
Other names M.G.R. Chennai Central, Chennai Central, Madras Central
Location Grand Western Trunk Road,
Kannappar Thidal, Periyamet,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600003
 India
Coordinates 13°04′57″N 80°16′30″E
Elevation 3.465 metres (11.37 ft)
Owned by Government of India
Operated by Southern Railway zone of Indian Railways
Line(s) Chennai–New Delhi
Chennai–Howrah
Chennai–Mumbai
Chennai–Bengaluru
Platforms 17
(12 Main station + 5 Chennai Suburban Terminal)
Tracks 17
Connections MTC, Suburban Rail, MRTS, Dr. M.G.R. Chennai Central Metro.
Construction
Structure type Romanesque[1]
Parking Available
Accessible
Other information
Status Functioning
Station code MAS
Zone(s) Southern Railway zone
Division(s) Chennai
History
Opened 1873; 151 years ago[2]
Rebuilt 1959; 65 years ago (first)
1998; 26 years ago (second)
Electrified 1931; 93 years ago[3]
Previous names
Madras Central (1873–1996)
Chennai Central (1996–2019)
Passengers
400,000/day[4] (400 trains (including 90 express/mail trains)/day[4])
Services
Location
Chennai Central
Location within Chennai
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Interactive map
Chennai Central (officially Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central Railway Station, formerly Madras Central)(station code: MAS[5]), is an NSG–1 category Indian railway station in Chennai railway division of Southern Railway zone.[6] It is the main railway terminus in the city of Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. It is the busiest railway station in South India and one of the most important hubs in the country. It is connected to Moore Market Complex railway station, Chennai Central metro station, Chennai Park railway station, and Chennai Park Town railway station. It is about 1.8 km (1.1 mi) from the Chennai Egmore railway station. The terminus connects the city to northern India, including Kolkata, Mumbai, and New Delhi, and different parts of India.
The century-old building of the railway station, designed by architect George Harding, is one of the most prominent landmarks in Chennai.[7] The station is also a main hub for the Chennai Suburban Railway system. It lies adjacent to the current headquarters of the Southern Railway and the Ripon Building. During the British Raj, the station served as the gateway to South India, and the station is still used as a landmark for the city and the state.
The station was renamed twice: first to reflect the name change of the city from Madras to Chennai in 1998, it was renamed from Madras Central to Chennai Central, and then to honour the AIADMK founder and the former chief minister of Tamil Nadu M. G. Ramachandran, it was renamed as Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central Railway Station on 5 April 2019.[8]
About 550,000 passengers use the terminus every day, making it the busiest railway station in South India.[9] Along with Chennai Egmore and Coimbatore Junction, the Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central is among the most profitable stations of the Southern Railway.[10] As per a report published in 2007 by the Indian Railways, Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central and Secunderabad Junction were awarded 183 points out of a maximum of 300 for cleanliness, the highest in the country.[11]
History[edit]
Central Station seen from the western banks of the Buckingham Canal, c. 1880
Chennai Central station, c. 1905
Central Station, Madras – Tucks Oilette (1911)[12]
Marking the initial days of the railways in the Indian subcontinent, the Madras Railway Company began to network South India in 1856. The first station was built at Royapuram, which remained the main station at that time. Expansion of the Madras Railways network, particularly the completion of the Madras–Vyasarpadi line,[13] called for a second station in Madras, resulting in Madras Central coming into being.[7]
Madras Central was built in 1873 at Park Town around the slopes of Periamet, then known as Narimedu or Hog's Hill,[14] as a second terminus to decongest the Royapuram harbour station, which was being used for port movements. The station was built on the open grounds that had once been called John Pereira's Gardens, belonging to Joao Pereira de Faria (John Pereira), a Portuguese merchant in the port town of Negapatam (present-day Nagapattinam) who settled in Madras in 1660. The garden had a house used by Pereira for rest and recreation. Having fallen into disuse, the garden had become a gaming den, with cockfighting being the favourite sport at that time, until when the Trinity Chapel was built nearby in 1831 and the Railways moved into the area in the 1870s.[13]
In 1907, Madras Central was made the Madras Railway Company's main station.[15] The station gained prominence after the beach line was extended further south in the same year, and Royapuram was no longer a terminus for Madras.[16] All trains were then terminated at Madras Central instead. The Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway Company was formed in 1908 and took over the Central station from the Madras Railway Company.[15] The station's position was further strengthened after the construction of the headquarters of the Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway (erstwhile Madras Railway and now known as the Southern Railway) adjacent to it in 1922.[17]
Madras Central was part of South Indian Railway Company during the British rule. The company was established in 1890 and was initially headquartered in Trichinopoly. Egmore railway station was made its northern terminus in 1908.[15] It was then shifted to Madurai and later to Madras Central. With the opening of the Egmore railway station, plans were first made of linking Madras Central and Egmore, which was later dropped.[15] The company operated a suburban electric train service for Madras city from May 1931 onwards in the Madras Beach–Tambaram section.[18] In 1959, additional changes were made to the station.[7] Electrification of the lines at the station began in 1979, when the section up to Gummidipoondi was electrified on 13 April 1979. The lines up to Tiruvallur were electrified on 29 November 1979 while the tracks along Platforms 1 to 7 were electrified on 29 December 1979.[19]
Expansion[edit]
In the 1980s, the Southern Railway required land for expansion of the terminus and was looking for the erstwhile Moore Market building located next to the terminus. In 1985, when the market building caught fire and was destroyed, the structure was transferred to the Railways by the government, and the Railways built a 13-storied complex to house the suburban terminus and railway reservation counter. The land in front of the building was made into a car park.[20] Following the renaming of the city of Madras in 1996, the station became known as Chennai Central. Due to increasing passenger movement, the main building was extended in 1998 with the addition of a new building on the western side with a similar architecture to the original. After this duplication of the main building, the station had 12 platforms.[7] Capacity at the station was further augmented when the multi-storeyed Moore Market Complex was made a dedicated terminus with three separate platforms for the Chennai Suburban Railway system. In the 1990s, when the IRCTC was formed, modular stalls came up and food plazas were set up.[21]
In 2005, the buildings were painted a light brown colour, but concurring with the views of a campaign by the citizens of Chennai and also to retain the old nostalgic charm, they were repainted in their original brick-red colour.[22] The station is the first in India to be placed on the cyber map.[7]
Location[edit]
The main station building in 2017.
The terminus lies on the southern arm of the diamond junction of Chennai's railway network, where all the lines of the Chennai Suburban Railway meet. The terminus is located about 19 km from Chennai International Airport. The main entrance is located at Park Town at the intersection of the arterial Poonamallee High Road, Pallavan Salai, and Wall Tax Road between the People's Park and the Southern Railways headquarters. The station premises is located on the grounds known as the Kannappar Thidal in Periyamet, on either side of the Buckingham Canal, formerly known as Cochrane's Canal, which separates the main station and the suburban terminus. Wall Tax Road runs alongside the station on the eastern side. There are two other entrances on the eastern and western sides of the complex. The eastern entrance on Wall Tax Road leads to platform no. 1,[23] and the western entrance lies at the entrance of the suburban terminus. The station is connected with the Park railway station and the Government General Hospital, both located across the road, by means of subways. During the building of the Chennai Metro the connection from Chennai Park to Chennai Central is by means of a steel footbridge.
Layout[edit]
Architecture[edit]
Built in the Gothic Revival style, the original station was designed by George Harding and consisted of four platforms[24][25] and a capacity to accommodate 12-coach trains.[21] It took another five years for the work to be completed, when the station was modified further by Robert Fellowes Chisholm with the addition of the central clock tower, Travancore 'caps' on the main towers, and other changes.[26] The redesign was eventually completed in 1900.[7] The main building, a combination of Gothic and Romanesque styles[7] has been declared as a heritage building.[27] The clock tower with the flagstaff, the tallest of the towers of the main building, has four faces and reaches a height of 136 ft.[28] It is set to chime every quarter of an hour and every hour.[7][21]
Side view of station extension in 2008.
The main entrance in 2006.
Panoramic view in 2008.
The station has a platform area of 51,182 square metres (excluding the suburban station building) and the total building area of the main station is 14,062 square metres.[29]
Platforms[edit]
Platform No.10 at the terminus.
Chennai Central is a terminal station with bay platforms. The average length of railway tracks in the station is 600 metres.[30] The entire complex has 17 platforms to handle long-distance trains with 5 platforms exclusively for suburban trains. The total length of the station is about 950 m. The main building has 12 platforms and handles long-distance trains. The complex for suburban trains is popularly known as the Moore Market complex. There is a platform 2A between platforms 2 and 3; it is used to handle short-length trains like the Chennai Rajadhani Express, Vijayawada Jan Shatabdi Express, Bengaluru Shatabdi Express, Mysuru Shatabdi Express and the Gudur Passenger. The 13-storied annexe building, the Moore Market Complex building, has 5 platforms and handles north- and westbound suburban trains.
Chennai Central used to have trains with special liveries until the early 1990s. The Brindavan Express used to have green livery with a yellow stripe running above and below the windows; Nilgiri Express (popularly known as the Blue Mountain Express) had blue livery. All trains now have the standard blue livery (denoting air-braked bogies). Notable exceptions include the Rajadhani, Shatabdi and the Jan Shatabdi expresses. The Sapthagiri Express, Tirupati Express has a vivid green/cream livery combination with a matching WAM4 6PE locomotive from Arakkonam (AJJ) electric locomotive shed.
Chennai Central, unlike many other major railway stations in India, is a terminus. The next station to Chennai Central, the Basin Bridge Junction, is the railway junction where three different lines meet.
As of 2015, all platforms except 2A platforms, in the station were able to accommodate trains with 24 coaches. Platform 2A is the shortest of all platforms in the station and can accommodate trains with 18 coaches.[31] Chennai Central is the only station that has a platform numbered 2A. Though it was built actually for delivering water and goods to the station staff, the Shatabdi Express now starts from here.
Bridge[edit]
Bridge No.7 across the Buckingham Canal connects the terminus with the railway yards and stations to the north. The bridge, measuring 33.02 m in length and carrying six tracks, acts as the gateway to the terminus. The bridge was originally resting on cast iron screw pile. Following the 2001 accident of Mangalore Chennai Mail killing 57 passengers, Southern Railway started replacing all bridges resting on screw piles, and the bridge was replaced with a new RCC box bridge resting on well foundation in September 2010, with ancillary works getting completed by March 2011.[32]
Traffic[edit]
On an average, 89 trains are operated daily from the station of which 12 have 24 coaches.[31] About 400 trains arrive and depart at the station daily, including about 86 pairs of mail/express trains, in addition to 857 suburban trains handled by the five platforms at the station's suburban terminus.[33][34][35] About 400,000 passengers use the terminus every day,[9] in addition to 20,000 visitors accompanying them to see-off or receive them,[21] generating a revenue of ₹6,590,214,293 (US$83 million) as of 2012–2013, making it the top revenue-generating station of the Southern Railway. There is likely to be around 180,000 passengers in the station at a given point.[21] As of 2015–16, the main station alone (excluding the suburban station) has an average passenger footfall of 95,560 per day. Passenger earnings in the same period amounted to ₹ 8947.4 million. The station managed 491 trains a day. It has been projected that the number of passengers using the main station per day in the next 40 years will be 650,000.[29]
The terminus also faces traffic problems. Often, express trains and EMU services that arrive at the Basin Bridge Junction in time have to be detained for non-availability of platforms at Chennai Central. Blocking of lines is a daily challenge owing to the traffic.[36]
Services[edit]
Chennai Central railway station is a major transit point for shipment of inland and sea fish in South India through trains. The terminus handles fish procured from Kasimedu which is sent to Kerala and sea fish from the West Coast which is brought to Chennai and ferried to West Bengal. As of 2012, on an average, the terminus handles transportation of 200 boxes of fish, each comprising 50 kilograms (110 lb) to 70 kilograms (150 lb) of consumable fish.[37] The station also handles 5,000 postal bags daily.[38]
Facilities[edit]
Inside the main station in 2007.
Arrivals being displayed in Tamil at Chennai Central Station
The station has bookshops, restaurants, accommodation facilities, internet browsing centres, and a shopping mall. The main waiting hall can hold up to 1,000 people.[39] In spite of being the most important terminus of the region, the station lacks several facilities such as coach position display boards.[40] The main concourses too have long exhausted their capacity to handle the increasing passenger crowd.[41] There are passenger operated enquiry terminals and seven touch-screen PNR status machines in the station.[42] The station has three split-flap timing boards,[43] electronic display boards and plasma TVs that mention train timings and platform number.[35][44] A passenger information center in the station has been upgraded with "Spot your Train" live train display facility, information kiosks and passenger digital assistance booths.[33] The terminus, however, has only 10 toilets, which is inadequate to its 350,000 passengers.[45]
In September 2018, a 5,000-litre drinking water vending reverse osmosis plant was commissioned in the station.[46]
As of 2008, there were 607 licensed railway porters in Chennai Central.[47] Four-seater battery operated vehicles are available to cater to the needs of the elderly and the physically impaired.[48]
On 26 September 2014, Chennai Central became the first in the country to get free Wi-Fi connectivity. The facility is being provided by RailTel, a public sector telecom infrastructure provider.[49]
Emergency medical care[edit]
In November 2012, a public interest writ petition was filed in the Madras High Court citing the lack of a full-fledged emergency medical care centre at the terminus.[50] Further to this, the Southern Railway invited expression of interest from several hospitals in the city to establish a medical care centre.[51][52]
On 15 April 2013, a new emergency medical care centre was opened. The centre has three beds, two doctors on duty and another on standby, four nurses, a paramedic team, and a round-the-clock ambulance. The centre is equipped with oxygen cylinders, an ECG, a defibrillator and resuscitation equipment. The terminus is the first railway station in the country to have facilities of an ambulance.[53]
Parking[edit]
The station has parking facilities for more than 1,000 two-wheelers.[54] About 1,000 cars are parked in the standard car park every day. Since March 2008, a premium car park facility for 80 cars in addition to its regular car park is functioning at the station. The cement-concrete-paved premium parking is located between the Moore Market reservation complex and the station's main building.[55][56] However, the station still faces parking problems. About 3,000 taxis arrives at the station every day.[57]
Maintenance[edit]
According to the Railway sources, as of July 2012, Chennai Central was 180 short of the sanctioned 405 maintenance employees, including mechanical, electrical and general maintenance, required for cleaning the interiors and exteriors of trains and undertaking routine mechanical and electrical maintenance of trains.[58] Contracts for cleaning the station has been awarded for a period of three years from 2010 for a value of ₹ 43.1 million.[59] In 2007, the number of dustbins in the station was 28.50 per 10,000 passengers.[11]
On average, about 51 train units depart and arrive at the station from different parts of the country every day. Of the 102 trains, a 12 are sent during the day and another 7 at night to the Basin Bridge Train Care Centre[60] for primary maintenance, which involves complete exterior and interior cleaning and total mechanical and electrical overhaul. The rest of the trains go through secondary maintenance or 'other-end attention' at the depot or 'turn back train attention' at Chennai Central itself. Secondary maintenance includes filling water, while the third is the 'other-end attention', in which the train, especially the toilets, is cleaned. The fourth category of trains, such as Sapthagiri Express and Pallavan Express, are turn-back trains, which arrive and leave in a short time from Chennai Central after toilet-cleaning and water-filling is done right at the terminus platform.[58]
The station has been divided into two zones for mechanised cleaning contracts.[61] As of 2008, Chennai Central had about 30 sanitary workers employed on a contractual basis in Zone I (platforms 1 to 6). Zone II (platforms 7 to 12) was cleaned by close to 40 railway employees.[30]
Yards and sheds[edit]
Train care centre[edit]
A station pilot WDS4B involved in shunting passenger trains in 2013.
A broad-gauge coach maintenance depot, called the Basin Bridge Train Care Centre, is located at the northern side of the terminus, where trains of 18 to 24 coaches are checked, cleaned and readied for its next trip after they return from round trips.[62][63] It is the largest train care centre under the Southern Railway where 30 pairs of trains are inspected every day. The yard has 14 pit lines, each 3-ft deep, to inspect undercarriage of trains, but only two lines can accommodate 24-coach trains. The rest are designed to park 18-coach trains. Five to six people are allotted to each train. As of 2012, the centre has 3,500 employees, a shortage of about 400.[63]
Water accumulated in pit lines are let out into the Buckingham Canal by means of drainage channels. However, as the yard is located in a basin area, water does not drain quickly enough.[64] In addition, the centre faces pests and other hygiene issues too.[65][66]
Electric trip shed[edit]
The terminus has an electric locomotive trip shed, the Basin Bridge electric locomotive trip shed, located north of the train care centre. It is one of the five locomotive trip sheds of the Southern Railway.[67] To lessen load on the shed, an additional electric trip shed has been created at Tondiarpet, which also serves as a crew change point for freights.[68]
Goods shed[edit]
The terminus has a goods shed attached to it at Salt Cotaurs.[69]
Renovation[edit]
Thoroughfare at Central Square in 2023.
Chennai Central gets renovation after 2010, is undertaken by the building division of the Southern Railway with the technical assistance provided by the Chennai Circle of Archaeological Survey of India. The work is carried out to ensure the original character of the building is maintained. The Station building has maroon colour since its inception in 1873.[70]
In February 2019, as part of the Railway Ministry's plan to install flag masts at 75 major stations in the country, a 100-foot flag mast was installed at the front of the main building of the station at a cost of ₹ 1.5 million. Weighing around 2 tonnes, the mast is made of galvanised iron pipes. The mast is one of the tallest in the city. The polyester-and-cotton flag is 60-ft wide and weighs around 9.5 kg, and can be hoisted both manually and electronically.[71]
Connectivity[edit]
Moore Market Complex, the suburban terminal of Chennai Central in 2008.
Chennai Central is a hub for suburban trains. Suburban lines originating from Chennai Central include West North Line, North Line, and West Line.[72] Chennai Park suburban station is in proximity to the station, thus facilitating connectivity to Tambaram/Chengalpet/Tirumalpur routes through South Line and South West Line. Chennai Central can be directly reached from all suburban stations and MRTS stations in and around Chennai (except Washermanpet and Royapuram) either through its own MMC Complex for suburban trains or through the nearby Park suburban station or the Park Town MRTS station. Currently, there is only one direct suburban train that plies from Chennai Beach Junction to Chennai Central via Washermanpet and Royapuram, and hence there is no frequent direct connectivity for these two stations to Chennai Central. The Chennai Park Town MRTS station is close to Chennai Central station.
An underground metro station of the Chennai Metro namely Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central metro station serves as the hub. It is one of the two metro stations where Corridor I (Blue Line) (Airport–Tiruvottiyur) of the project will intersect with Corridor II (Green Line) (Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central Metro–St. Thomas Mount via Egmore, Puratchi Thalaivi Dr. J. Jayalalithaa CMBT Metro). The metro station, is at a depth of 25 metres (82 ft), is the largest of all metro stations in the city with an area of over 70,000 square metres (750,000 sq ft).[73] The station will act as a transit point for passengers from the Central, Park Town, and Park railway stations.[74] It is estimated that more than 100,000 commuters will utilise the station daily.[73]
Chennai Metro in 2015.
Chennai Central is connected to the Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus and other parts of the city by buses operated by the Metropolitan Transport Corporation,[75] by means of separate bus lanes near the main entrance, close to the concourse. There are prepaid auto and taxi stands at the station premises.[76] However, only 30 autorickshaws are presently attached to the prepaid counter parking, as Chennai Metro Rail has acquired its parking area for station construction.[77]
The terminus is connected to the Park railway station and the Government General Hospital by two subways on either side. The two subways, which are one of the first in the city, are used by thousands of commuters day round.[78] Nevertheless, jaywalking prevails as a substantial number of commuters prefer crossing the road,[79] at times resulting in accidents.[78]
Suburban trains from Chennai Suburban Terminal railway station in 2010.
The terminus is connected with the Egmore station, the other most important terminus of the city, by a circuitous and congested route covering a distance of 11.2 km via Chennai Beach. There was initially a proposal to connect the two termini by means of an elevated section with double-line broad-gauge electrified track with two elevated platforms at Chennai Central, at the cost of ₹ 930 million, which would cut the distance to 2.5 km.[80][81] The project, approved on 8 April 2003 and initially aimed to be completed by 2005, was later scrapped owing to the expected rate of return on the project being only 1 to 2 per cent,[82] poor soil conditions on the Poonamallee High Road,[83] and other issues.[84]
Environmental impact[edit]
The portion of the Buckingham canal running near the terminus and beneath Pallavan Salai is covered for 250 m, which makes the task of maintaining the canal difficult. After being desilted in 1998, the covered stretch of the canal near the terminus was cleaned in September 2012. Garbage is dumped into the canal via the openings near the Chennai Central premises. An estimated 6,000 cubic meters of silt was removed from the 2-m-deep canal.[85]
Incidents[edit]
On 14 August 2006, a major fire broke out in Chennai Central, completely destroying a bookshop.[86]
On 29 April 2009, a suburban EMU train from Chennai Central Suburban terminal was hijacked by an unidentified man, who rammed it into a stationary goods train at the Vyasarpadi Jeeva railway station, 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) northwest of Chennai Central. Four passengers were killed and 11 were injured.[87] The train, which was scheduled to depart at 5:15 am, started at 4:50 am instead.[88] The train was moving with a speed of 92 km per hour with 35 passengers on board at the time of collision.[89]
On 6 August 2012, a man hailing from Nepal perched atop the clock tower of the station's main building, creating a commotion. He was later safely persuaded back down the tower by the City Police and Southern Railway officials.[28]
On 1 May 2014, the station witnessed two low-intensity blasts in two coaches S4 and S5 of the stationary Guwahati–Bengaluru Cantt. Superfast Express, killing one female passenger and injuring at least fourteen.[90][91]
In April 2020, all trains were cancelled till 30 September, except Chennai Central - New Delhi Rajdhani Express due to COVID-19.[92][93]
Security[edit]
In a first of its kind for the railways, a bomb disposal squad of the railway protection force, equipped with state-of-the-art gadgets imported at a cost of over ₹ 2.5 million, was inaugurated at Chennai Central in May 2002. The squad functions round the clock and its personnel were trained at the National Security Guard Training Centre at Maneswar and the Tamil Nadu Commando School.[94] In 2009, following the train accident at the Vyasarpadi Jeeva railway station, surveillance cameras were installed at the suburban terminus platforms. A security boundary wall 200 m long was erected along platform 14 to check unauthorised persons entering the station. Two security booths were planned, one each at the main terminus and the suburban terminus.[95] A government railway police (GRP) station is located on the first floor at the western end,[96] headed by a DSP and two inspectors.[97]
In 2009, 39 CCTV cameras were installed in the premises along with a control room.[98] In 2012, about 120 CCTV cameras are to be installed in Chennai Central.[99] In April 2012, the GRP and the Railway Protection Force (RPF) together launched a helpline known as Kaakum karangal (literally meaning 'Protecting hands'). This involved dividing the terminus into six sectors and deploying 24 police personnel for security.[100]
On 15 November 2012, Integrated Security System (ISS) was launched at the station, which comprises sub-systems such as CCTV surveillance system with 54 IP-based cameras, under-vehicle scanning system (UVSS) for entries and exits, and personal and X-ray baggage screening system. In addition, explosive detection and disposal squad have been deployed. The sub-system will be integrated by networking and monitored at the centralised control rooms. Existing CCTV network of suburban platforms has also been integrated to this system.[99][101][102]
Future[edit]
In 2004, a second terminal was planned near the Moore Market Complex, with six platforms to be constructed in the first phase of the project and four platforms each in the second and third phases. For additional infrastructure, the goods yard at Salt Cotaurs will be closed to provide more pit line and stabling line facilities for the new terminal.[36]
In 2007, the Railway Board declared a plan to develop the terminus into a world-class one at a cost of ₹200 million (US$2.5 million),[103] along with two other stations (Thiruvananthapuram Central and Mangalore Central),[104] and a high-level committee was formed in 2009 to expedite the project at a total cost of ₹1,000 million (US$13 million).[105] The plan included creating multi-level platforms where express and suburban trains could arrive and depart from the same complex.[104] However, the project is yet to begin.[106]
In June 2012, the first skywalk in Chennai connecting Chennai Central, Park Railway Station and Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital was planned at a cost of ₹200 million (US$2.5 million).[107] It will be 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) long, linking the station with nine points, including Evening Bazaar, Government Medical College and Ripon Buildings on Poonamallee High Road.
In February 2013, as part of a national initiative to eliminate ballast tracks at major stations, washable aprons—ballast-less tracks or tracks on a concrete bed—were installed along the entire length of tracks of platforms 3, 4 and 5 at the terminus. Washable aprons that are already present for a few metres in some of the platforms at the terminus will be extended, viz. 30 metres (98 ft) on platform 3, 200 metres (660 ft) on platform 4, and 50 metres (160 ft) on platform 5, while new ones will be built on platforms with ballast tracks.[108]
Chennai Central is among the 23 stations in the country that will be privatised as part of redevelopment under the BFOT (Build, Finance, Operate, Transfer) scheme. More passengers amenities will be provided on a 1.545-acre plot of land adjacent to the Moore Market Suburban complex allotted for commercial exploitation. Additional space for operational purposes, including the station master's room, passenger information centre, movement control room, Railway Protection Force control room containing closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras, Government Railway Police station, and Travelling Ticket Examiner chart room, covering a total of 2,873.76 square metres will be built.
Dr. M.G. Ramachandran
Former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu
The developer will maintain the station premises for 15 years, while the lease period of the additional land and aerial space to be developed will be 45 years.[29]
In 2017, the state government proposed to build a commercial square called the Central Square in the around the station.[109][110][111]
Renaming[edit]
On 6 March 2019, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced at the National Democratic Alliance political rally, which was held in Kancheepuram in the presence of then Railways Minister Piyush Goyal that the iconic station will be renamed after the AIADMK founder and the former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu M. G. Ramachandran.[112][113]
On 5 April 2019, the station was officially renamed "Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central Railway Station."[8]
The name is currently India's longest and the world's second-longest name for a railway station after Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch in Wales.[114]
In popular culture[edit]
2009 commemorative stamp of Chennai Central
Chennai Central railway station is one of the most prominent landmarks in the city that is often featured in movies and other pop culture in the region. The station has been used in numerous Indian novels and film and television productions over the years. Many films and television programs have been filmed at the station, including:
Cochin Express (1967) (Malayalam)[115]
No.20 Madras Mail (1990) (Malayalam)
Kadhal Kottai (1996) (Tamil)
Mudhalvan (1999) (Tamil)
Kushi (2000) (Tamil)
Roja Kootam (2002) (Tamil)
Madrasapattinam (2010) (Tamil)
Siruthai (2011) (Tamil)
Thodari (2016) (Tamil)
Bigil (2019) (Tamil)
The station has been poetised by Vijay Nambisan in his 1988 award-winning poem 'Madras Central' published in 1989. The poem is regarded as a modern classic.[116][117]
In 2009, the Department of Posts featured Chennai Central in a postal stamp.[118]

Edward Elliot's Beach
Besant Nagar Beach
Bessie
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Type Sandy beach
Location Besant Nagar, Chennai, India
Coordinates 12.999529°N 80.272411°E
Etymology Edward Elliot
Operated by Corporation of Chennai
Edward Elliot's Beach, simply called as Elliot's Beach and popularly known as Besant Nagar Beach or the Bessie, is a natural urban beach located in the Besant Nagar neighbourhood of Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. It is located next to the southern tip of the Marina Beach,[1] and was named after Edward Elliot, a chief magistrate and superintendent of police of the Madras Presidency in colonial India.[2] It has the Shrine of Our Lady of Good Health—also known as Annai Vailankanni Church—on its shore, and the Ashtalakshmi Temple nearby.[3]
During the colonial era, Elliot's beach was fairly exclusive to white people only. Today, the beach and its Kaj Schmidt Memorial are cultural landmarks of Chennai, visited by thousands daily. Safety on and around the beach is ensured by a police outpost and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs).
Karl Schmidt memorial[edit]
Schmidt Memorial in daylight
Schmidt Memorial in the evening
The Ashtalakshmi temple at the beach
A prominent landmark on this beach is the Karl Schmidt Memorial. The memorial is named after the Dutch sailor who lost his life trying to save a girl from drowning.[4]
Elliot's Beach is one of the cleanest and safest beaches in the city of Chennai. It is located towards the south of Marina Beach.
Besant Nagar Beach Road
The Ashtalakshmi Temple, located near the southern end of the beach, was built in 1976 in modern style of architecture.[5]
Elliots beach at night
Safety[edit]
There is a police outpost on the beach, which is policed by all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). In 2010, there were 11 drowning cases reported off the beach.[6] In August 2012, the government sanctioned two more all-terrain vehicles for patrolling the beach.[7]

Express Avenue
Express Avenue building
Location Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Coordinates 13.058606°N 80.2641537°E
Address Whites road, Royapettah
Opening date 31 August 2010; 13 years ago[1]
Developer Express Infrastructure Private Limited
Owner Kavita Singhania
No. of stores and services 210
No. of anchor tenants 8
Total retail floor area 900,000 square feet (84,000 m2)[1][2]
No. of floors 3
Parking 3-level basement parking
Website www.expressavenue.in
Express Avenue (Tamil: எக்ஸ்ப்ரெஸ் அவென்யூ) is a shopping mall in Chennai promoted by Express Infrastructure, A division of Express Newspapers Pvt. Ltd.[3] which is bought by Ramnath Goenka from the monies of tha capitalists partner Raja Mohan Prasad and is held in trust by the current legal heirs for the family of Raja Mohan Prasad as per the trust deed given by Ramnath Goenka to Raja Mohan Prasad and is home to the largest gaming arcade in South India. Built at a cost of ₹7,500 million (US$94 million), the mall is spread over 1,750,000-square-foot (163,000 m2), including 900,000-square-foot (84,000 m2) of leasable (retail) area. The mall has 8 anchor tenants and 150 vanilla tenants.[2]
Description[edit]
The mall is situated near the Royapettah Clock Tower. The mall is built on an 8-acre site inside the historic Indian Express Estate and has four floors of retail space, a building for corporate offices and a hotel. Out of 10 acres, about 3.57 acres have been taken up by buildings. The rest have been used for car parking, drive-ways and landscaping. In all, the mall has 26 lifts, 34 escalators and 4 travelators.[2]
Express Avenue hosts a mixture of shopping, business and leisure. The mall is bounded by Whites Road, Woods Road and Patullos Road and has a three-level basement parking space for over 1,500 cars and a parking area for bikes. It has a total development of 1,500,000 square feet (140,000 m2) including 900,000 sq ft of retail space, 100,000 sq. ft of hotel, 200,000 sq. ft of office space, 400,000 sq ft of parking space.[2] The mall was inaugurated on 26 May 2010.[4]
E Hotel, a 44-room four-star boutique hotel, was built in the mall at a cost of ₹ 300 million.[1]
Express Avenue panorama view
Entertainment and leisure[edit]
The entertainment portion of the mall is 70,000 square feet (6,500 m2). The Escape Cinemas, the branch of PVR Cinemas, consists of an 08-screens multiplex with a capacity of 1,600 seats covering 50,000 square feet (4,600 m2), which is the city's largest cineplex. California-based Giovanni Castor played a key role in the overall design of Escape.[5] The mall is home to the largest gaming arcade in South India.
Besides stand-alone stores like Bath & Body Works, Montblac, and Armani Exchange the mall has an 80,000-square-foot (7,400 m2) Lifestyle and a 65,000 sq. ft Pantaloon, Smart Bazaar, H&M and Forever 21. The anchor tenants are expected to take 300,000 to 400,000 sq ft, while the vanilla tenants would occupy up to 400,000 sq. ft. The 50,000-square-foot (4,600 m2) food court has 25 counters and includes food chains such as Burger King, Taco Bell, KFC and Pizza Hut. The mall has six atria with a height not less than 75 ft each. The atrium areas are covered with tensile fabric and the centre of the atrium is covered with glass.[2]
Food court[edit]
The 50,000-square-foot (4,600 m2) court, also called EA Garden, has 25 counters with several food and beverage options including Oriental, North Indian, South Indian, American and Italian.[6]
Fun City[edit]
Fun City, a prominent attraction of the mall, is a play area for children.
Business chamber[edit]
The business chamber is the first such marketing space to be built inside a mall in India. The area of this zone is over 200,000 sq ft (19,000 m2) of office space at prices intended to compete with special economic zones and IT parks elsewhere in the city.
Parking[edit]
The three-level basement parking is equipped to handle about 2,000 vehicles.[6]
Gallery[edit]
Christmas Snow Village 2022
Squash World Cup 2023
Easter at Express Avenue Mall
SHE - THe Warrior
Valentine's Day 2023
Republic Day 2023
Christmas Celebration
Children's Day Carnival 2022
Interiors of Express Avenue
EA Bot - India's first customer assistant robot deployed in Express Avenue Chennai, Tamil Nadu

Kapaleeshwarar Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District Chennai
Deity Kapaleeshwarar (Shiva), Karpagambal (Parvati)
Location
Location Mylapore
State Tamil Nadu
Country  India
Kapaleeshwarar Temple, Mylapore, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Geographic coordinates 13.0337°N 80.2699°E[1]
Architecture
Type Dravidian architecture
Elevation 54 m (177 ft)
The Kapaleeshwarar Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to the god Shiva located in Mylapore, Chennai in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The temple was built around the 7th century CE and is an example of South Indian Architecture.[1][2]
According to the Puranas, Parvati worshipped her husband Shiva in the form of a peahen (mayil in Tamil), giving the vernacular name Mylai (Mayilāi) to the area that developed around the temple.[3] Shiva is worshiped as Kapaleeshwarar, and is represented by the lingam. Parvati is worshipped as Karpagambal (goddess of the wish-yielding tree). The presiding deity is revered in the 7th-century Tamil Shaiva canonical work, the Tevaram, written by Tamil saint poets known as the Nayanars and classified as one of the Paadal Petra Sthalam.
The temple has numerous shrines, with those of Kapaleeshwarar and Karpagambal being the most prominent. The temple complex houses many halls. The temple has six daily rituals at various times from 5:30 a.m. to 10 p.m., and four yearly festivals on its calendar. The Aṟupatimūvar festival celebrated during the Tamil month of Panguni as part of the brahmotsava is the most prominent festival in the temple.
The temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu.[4]
Legend[edit]
Image of Karpagambal and Kapaleeshwarar
The temple's name is derived from the words kapala (head) and Ishvara, an epithet of Shiva. According to the Puranas, during the meeting of the deities Brahma and Shiva at top of Mount Kailash, Brahma failed to show the due respect to Shiva. Due to this, Shiva plucked off one of the five heads (kapala) of Brahma. In an act of penance, Brahma came down to the site of Mylapore and installed a lingam to please Shiva.[5] This place is known as Sukra Puri, Veda Puri, among many other names including "Kailaye Mayilai" and "Mayilaye Kayilai" (lit. 'Mylapore is Kailash'). According to regional legend, Shiva's consort Parvati (Karpagambal), due to a curse became a pea-hen and did penance here to get back her original form. Her son Murugan received the spear (vel) for the destruction of a demon from Parvati here. Brahma had worshipped here to get rid of his ego and get back his power to create. The four Vedas have worshipped here. Shukra worshipped Shiva here and got back his lost eye. The daughter of Sivanesa Chettiar Angam Poompavai, who died due to snake bite, was resurrected here by the powers of the Nayanar saint Sambandar.[2] Vayilar, another Nayanar saint, attained salvation here. .[6]
History[edit]
Facade of the temple
The temple festival in c. 1940
The temple is generally thought to be built in the 7th century CE by the ruling Pallavas.[7] This view is based on references to the temple in the hymns of the Nayanar saints. However, the Nayanar Sambandar and the saint Arunagirinathar make clear reference to the Kapaleeshwarar temple being located by a seashore.[8] There are inscriptions dating back to 12th century inside the temple.[9] The temple's 120 ft gopuram[9] (gateway tower) was built during 1906 with stucco figures adorning it.[2][7] The temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu.[10]
The Temple[edit]
Bulls depicted in the decorated gopuram of the Kapaleeshwarar Temple.
Kapaleeshwarar Temple. Chennai. 2010
Pilgrims taking offerings to festival from Kapaleeshwarar Temple, Chennai. 2010
The Kapaleeshwarar temple is of typical Dravidian architectural style, with the gopuram overpowering the street on which the temple sits. This temple is also a testimonial for the vishwakarmas sthapathis. There are two entrances to the temple marked by the gopuram on either side. The east gopuram is about 40 m high, while the smaller western gopuram faces the sacred tank.[11]
The vahanas ("vehicles") at the temple include the bull, adhikaranandi, elephant, bandicoot, peacock, goat and parrot, while a golden chariot is a recent addition. Statues of the presiding divine couple are seated on a vahana or chariot which is brought in a procession around the temple while the temple band plays music. Devotees gather around the vahanas and consider it a privilege to pull / lift the deities on the vahana. There is also a peacock and a peahen caged inside the temple, to symbolize the tradition that Karpagambal had come in the form of peahen to plead to Kapaleeshwarar.
Sapta Sthana Shiva temples[edit]
This temple is one of the Sapta Sthana Shiva temples in Mylapore area. (one of the seven sacred Shiva temples in Mylapore).[12] They are:
Karaneeswarar Temple
Tirttapaleeswarar Temple
Velleeswarar Temple
Virupakshiswarar Temple
Valeeswarar Temple
Malleeswarar Temple
Kapaleeshwarar Temple
In addition to these "Sapta Sthana Shiva sthalas", the Ekambareshwarar–Valluvar temple in the neighbourhood is traditionally considered the indispensable eighth.[13]
The tank[edit]
The theppakulam or the temple tank lies to the west of the temple. Known as the Kapaleeshwarar Tank or the Mylapore Tank, it is one of the oldest and well-maintained theppakulams in the city, measuring about 190 m in length and 143 m in breadth.[14] The tank has a storage capacity of 119,000 cubic metre and has water all through the year.[14] The 16-pillared, granite-roofed structure, known as the mandapam at the centre of this tank is known for its significance during the three-day annual float festival, when idols of Kapaleeshwarar and other deities are taken around the tank to the chanting of Vedic hymns.[14]
In 2014, ₹ 56.5 million was allotted to build a 2,150-meter-long pavement around the tank.[14]
Religious practises[edit]
The temple priests perform the puja (rituals) on a daily basis and during festivals. Like other Shiva temples of Tamil Nadu, the priests belong to the Shaiva community. The temple rituals are performed six times a day; Ushathkalam at 6:00 a.m., Kalasanthi at 9:00 a.m., Uchikalam at 1:00 p.m., Sayarakshai at 5:00 p.m., Irandamkalam at 7:00 p.m. and Ardha Jamam at 9:00 p.m. There is a separate calendar for the Rahu Abhishekam (sacred ablution): it is performed twice in a day at 11:30 a.m and 5:30 p.m. and additionally twice at various times in the day. Each ritual comprises four steps: abhisheka (sacred bath), alangaram (decoration), neivethanam (food offering) and deepa aradanai (waving of lamps) for both Kapaleeshwarar and Karpagambal. The worship is held amidst music with nadasvaram (pipe instrument) and tavil (percussion instrument), religious instructions in the Vedas (sacred text) read by priests and prostration by worshippers in front of the temple mast. There are weekly rituals like somavaram and sukravaram, fortnightly rituals like pradosham and monthly festivals like amavasai (new moon day), kiruthigai, pournami (full moon day) and sathurthi.[8][15] During Friday worship, Karpagambal is decorated with a kasu mala, a garland made of gold coins.
Festivals[edit]
Murtis of Karpagambal and Kapaleeshwarar
Devotees praying at KapaleeshwararTemple, Chennai. 2010
During the Tamil month of Panguni, the traditional Brahmotsavam (annual festival) takes place when the entire neighborhood comes alive with a mela (carnival)-like atmosphere. Since this month corresponds to the mid-March to mid-April duration, the Kapaleeshwarar temple celebrates the nine day-long as Panguni Peruvila (Spring festival).[16] The festival starts with dhvajarohanam (flag hoisting), includes the terotsavam, (festival of chariot), Arupathimoovar festival and concludes with the Tirukkalyanam (Marriage of Kapaleeshwararand Karpagambal). In Brahmotsavam, the idols of Kapaleeshwarar and Karpagambal are decorated with clothes and jewels, are mounted on a vahana, and then taken around the temple and its water tank in a pradakshinam (a clockwise path when seen from above). This is repeated with different vahanas over the next nine days. The more important of the individual pradakshinams are the Athigara Nandhi on the third day, the Rishaba Vahanam on the midnight of the fifth day, the ther (about 13 meters in height and pulled by people) on the seventh morning, and the Aṟupatimūvar festival on the eighth day.[17]
The Arupathimoovar festival is the most important procession.[7] It is named after the sixty-three Nayanar saints. All sixty-three Nayanar idols follow the Kapaleeshwarar idol on this procession. During the car festival, Kapaleeshwarar is depicted holding a bow while seated on a throne, with Karpagambal alongside.[18] Brahma is depicted as driving the ther. The chariot is decorated with flowers and statues; there are huge gatherings of devotees to pull the ther. The car festival of 1968 is documented in the documentary film Phantom India by Louis Malle.[citation needed]
Religious work and saints[edit]
View of the temple tank at dawn.
Inner prakaram (corridor) of the temple.
The main tower at the temple.
There is a reference to the temple in Sangam literature of the 1st to 5th centuries and the earliest post-Sangam mention is found in the 6th century Tamil literature. The temple and the deity were immortalized in Tamil poetry in the works of Tevaram by poet saint belonging to the 7th century – Thirugnana Sambanthar has composed the 6th Poompavai pathigam in praise of the temple.[8] Arunagirinathar, a 15th-century poet, sings praise of the temple in Tirumayilai Tirupugal. The 12th-century poet Gunaveera Pandithar sings about Neminathan under Theerthangar neminathar pugazh.[19] Tirumayilai Prabanthangal is a compilation of four works on the temple and the deity.[19]

Marina Beach, or simply the Marina, is a natural urban beach in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India, along the Bay of Bengal. The beach runs from near Fort St. George in the north to Foreshore Estate in the south, a distance of 6.0 km (3.7 mi),[1] making it the second longest urban beach in the world, after Cox's Bazar Beach.[2][3][4] It is a prominent landmark in Chennai.
Marina Beach
Marina Beach as seen from the Chennai Lighthouse
Location Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Coast Coromandel, Bay of Bengal
Type Urban, natural sandy beach
Demarcated 1884; 140 years ago
Total length 13 km (8.1 mi)
Length of promenade 6 km (3.7 mi)
Maximum width 437 m (1,434 ft)
Orientation North–South
Notable landmarks Lighthouse, Anna Memorial, M.G.R. and Amma Memorial, Napier Bridge
Governing authority Corporation of Chennai
The Marina is a primarily sandy beach, with an average width of 300 m (980 ft)[5] and the width at the widest stretch is 437 m (1,434 ft). Bathing and swimming at the Marina are legally prohibited because of the dangers, as the undercurrent is very turbulent. It is one of the most crowded beaches in the country and attracts about 30,000 visitors a day during weekdays[6] and 50,000 visitors a day during the weekends and on holidays.[7][8][9] During summer months, about 15,000 to 20,000 people visit the beach daily.[10]
History[edit]
The beach promenade in 1913
Before the 16th century, there were frequent incident of inundation of land near the coast due to rise in sea level. When the sea withdrew, several ridges and lagoons were left behind. On the southern side of Fort St. George, one such sand ridge ran from the mouth of the Cooum River to the present site of the Presidency College. On the rear side of the ridge was a huge depression on which the college grounds were later developed. The ridge is the site of the present-day beach.[11] When Fort St. George was built in 1640, the sea was too close to the fort. The building of the harbor near the fort resulted in sand accretion to the south of the fort and the harbor and the sea, which was washing the ramparts of the fort, moved afar at about 2.5 km away from the fort creating a wide beach between the land and the sea.[11]
Before the Madras harbor was built, the beach was just a strip of mud, teeming with mudskippers. The beach washed up close to the present day road for a long time until the harbor was built in 1881. Mount Stuart Elphinstone Grant Duff, the governor of Madras from 1881 to 1886, who was captivated by the beach on an earlier visit to the city in the late 1870s,[12][13] conceived and built the promenade along the beach in 1884 by extensively modifying and layering with soft sand. He also gave it the name Madras Marina in the same year.[12][13] Since the early 19th century, a number of public buildings were constructed fronting the beach.[11]
Ever since the harbor was built, the area south of the port has accreted significantly, forming the present day's beach mainly due to the presence of wave breakers laid for the construction of the harbor, although the coast in the northern region has undergone severe erosion.[14] Eventually, the north-drifting current widened the beach to its present extent. The beach was formed as a result of arresting the littoral drift by the port's breakwater.[15][16] The area of the beach is increasing 40 sq m every year due to progradation.[17]
C. N. Annadurai's Memorial
M.G.R. and Amma Memorial
Since the creation of the promenade in 1884, there were several additions along the stretch. The country's first aquarium was established as one of the first additions in 1909. Shortly after the Independence, the Triumph of Labour statue and the Gandhi statue in 'march to Dandi' stride, which has been duplicated on the lawns of the Parliament House, were erected on the beach. In 1968, a number of statues of icons of Tamil literature was erected to mark the first World Tamil Conference, including Avvaiyar, Tiruvalluvar, Kambar, Subramania Bharathiyar, Bharathidasan, the Dravidologist Caldwell, G. U. Pope and Veeramamunivar. Anna memorial was built in 1970 and the M.G.R. and Amma Memorial in 1988, shortening the stretch at its northern end. Later addition was a statue for Kamaraj.[12] In December 2016, the then chief minister of Tamil Nadu J. Jayalalithaa was also buried here, inside the M.G.R. Memorial campus and a foundation stone for construction of a memorial for her there has been laid.[18] On 8 August 2018, former chief minister of Tamil Nadu M. Karunanidhi was buried beside his mentor Annadurai at the Marina Beach.[19]
Ecology[edit]
Environment[edit]
Magnetite and other heavy minerals (dark) in the beach's quartz sand
The Marina beach was famed for its pristine beauty, jolly ambiance, and rich ecosystems.[20] However, since the middle of the 20th century, the beach and water have become polluted.[21] Proliferation of plastic bags, human waste, and other pollutants have rendered many parts of the beach unusable. In recent years, many voluntary organizations have taken up the task of cleaning up the Marina and protecting the ecosystem. Particular efforts include protection of olive ridley turtle nests along the Neelankarai section of the beach.[22][23]
Flora and fauna[edit]
Marina Beach lies on the stretch of coast where olive ridley sea turtles, a species classified as Schedule 1 of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 (critically endangered), nest during mating season, chiefly between late October and April peaking from mid-January to mid-February.[24] The Ennore–Mamallapuram zone,[24] on which the beach lies, is one of the three major nesting grounds on the Indian coast.[25] However, with the expansion of the shrimp trawling fishery in the eastern coast of India in the mid-1970s, several individuals of the species are washed ashore dead every year.[22][25][26] The eggs laid by the females along the beach are also sold in the local market by the fishermen and traders.[24] In 1977, a recovery program was started by the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute.[24] Many volunteer organizations in the city, such as the Students' Sea Turtle Conservation Network and the Sea Turtle Protection Force of the TREE Foundation, get involved in conservation of the species along the coast.[22][27]
Meiofaunal composition at the Marina Beach chiefly includes turbellarians, nematodes, polychaetes, oligochaetes, and harpacticoids.[28] Species of gastrotrichs are also found in the region.
Common fishes found along the beach include mullets, sharks, silver bellies, rays, ribbon fish, skates, whitebait, dussumieria, Jew fish, horse mackerel, crabs, seer, pellona, pomfret, perches, lactarius, lethrinus, flying fish, engraulis, sardines, lobsters, sabre fish, barracuda, hilsa, tunny fish, Indian salmon, leather jackets, cookup, breams, catfish, snappers, synagris, bonito, soles, polynemus, and prawns, among others.[29]
Dimensions and characteristics[edit]
The Marina is a natural urban sandy beach along the Coramandel coast on the Bay of Bengal. Primarily sandy, the beach spans about 13 km (8.1 mi), running from near Fort St. George in the north to Besant Nagar in the south and is the longest natural urban beach in India.[30] The average width of the beach is 300 m (980 ft) and the width at the widest stretch is 437 m (1,434 ft).
Infrastructure and activities[edit]
The Rock Fountain
Marina beach is a major tourist attraction of the city. People visiting Chennai make a point to visit the beach. It is also the main place for the local people to escape from the summer heat.[9] The beach is popular for its shops and food stalls run by about 500 shops run by about 1,212 vendors.[31][32] The memorials and statues, morning walk, joggers' track, lovers' spot, aquarium, and the like make it a hangout for people of all ages. Kite flying and beach cricket are common sports at the beach, and there are also facilities for pony rides. Beach cricket at the Marina dates back several decades. However, Chennai City Police has banned it at different points due to its interference with traffic and beach walkers.[33] The sea is generally rough and waves are strong. There are fishermen colonies present at both ends of the beach. There are also joyrides, merry-go-rounds and mini giant wheels along the stretch, although they are installed without permission from any government agency.[34]
Fishing nets on the beach
A night view of the beach promenade
There are two swimming pools along the stretch—the Marina swimming pool and the Anna swimming pool. The Marina swimming pool was built in 1947 and is located on a 1.5-acre compound opposite the Presidency College. The pool is 100 m long and 34 m wide, bigger than the standard Olympic pool size of 50 m × 25 m and is 3 to 5.5 feet (0.91 to 1.68 m) deep. The shallow end is 3.5 feet deep. It is maintained by Corporation of Chennai. It underwent renovation in 1994, 2004, and 2009 (at ₹7 million).[35][36] On an average, the swimming pool receives 1,500 people. During the summer months of April and May, the footfall is goes up to 2,500 people.[35] The pool can accommodate around 400 people at any given time and has 10 cloak rooms.[36] As of 2018, there were 30 staff in the pool and six surveillance cameras.[37] The Anna swimming pool is located opposite the clock tower building of the University of Madras and virtually remains hidden behind the Anna Square bus terminus. The pool is said to be the first Olympic size pool to be built in Tamil Nadu. It was constructed in 1976 with a diving board. However, the diving board was removed later during a renovation. The pool is 4 to 11 feet (1.2 to 3.4 m) deep. It also has a toddler pool that is 2.5 feet (0.76 m). Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu (SDAT) conducts regular coaching camps at the pool.[38]
The oval-shaped skating arena at the beach has an outer railing and standing area for people to watch from.[38]
As part of the 'Chennai Forever' initiative by the Tamil Nadu government, a 34-foot (10 m) tall, artificial waterfall was installed in September 2005 at a cost of ₹ 1.5 million.[39] A visitor center near the Cooum River mouth on the Marina, similar to the Marina Barrage Visitor Centre in Singapore and San Antonio Visitor Center in the United States, has been planned as part of an initiative to create awareness of the need for clean waterways.[40]
In 2008, two floating fountains with spray height of 100 feet with color lights for night view were planned to be installed in sea waters off the beach.[41] In 2010, the Chennai Corporation procured new cleaning equipment to clean the beach at a cost of ₹ 8.011 million. These included a sand-cleaning machine capable of cleaning 15,000 m2 area in an hour procured at a cost of ₹ 3.267 million, three skid steer loaders to clean narrow lanes commissioned at a cost of ₹ 2.652 million, imported lawn mower, ride-on mechanical sweeper, tree pruner and hedge trimmer. An automatic ticket-vending machine at a cost of ₹ 170,000 was also commissioned at the Marina swimming pool for managing the crowd. The corporation also planned to construct two more public conveniences at the beach.[42] About 150 corporation staff, including a junior engineer, maintains the lawns and service lanes on the beach.[32]
As of 2013, the 3.1-km stretch of the beach from the Triumph of Labor statue to the lighthouse has 31 high-mast lamps.[43]
According to police statistics, about 5,000 people use the 2-km-long Loop Road daily for their morning walk.[44]
As of 2017, there were 1,544 vendors on the beach, which increased to 1,962 by 2019. In 2019, the Corporation decided to restrict the licensed vendors to 900.[45] There are toilets at six locations across the stretch and about 175 sanitary workers deployed at the beach on shift basis.[45]
The beach had facility to park 2,271 two-wheelers, 457 cars, and 80 vans and buses.[45]
Structures along the beach[edit]
Chennai lighthouse as seen from Marina Beach
PWD Complex
Being the city's primary area for recreation, the entire stretch features numerous statues and monuments that have come up over the years along the beach promenade, called Kamaraj Salai. While the beach stretches along the eastern side of the road, the western side is dotted with various governmental institutions and historic and stately buildings from the British rule all along its length. Victory War Memorial, a memorial for the warriors who lost their lives in the World Wars, marks the northern end of the beach. Memorials for C. N. Annadurai, M. G. Ramachandran, J. Jayalalithaa and M. Karunanidhi, former chief ministers of Tamil Nadu, are present on the northern end of the promenade known as the Anna Square. As of May 2018, a Lilliputian Children's Traffic Park was under construction near the Anna Memorial adjacent to the Anna Swimming Pool at a cost of ₹ 20.7 million. The traffic park measures 4,140 square meters, with facilities such as a viewing gallery, walking track, children's play area, traffic sign boards, and a riding track.[46]
All along the length of the promenade, stone statues adorn the roadside area of the beach starting from the Triumph of Labour statue, the first statue erected in the beach, near the memorials at the Anna Square to Mahatma Gandhi statue near the lighthouse. Most statues are of national or local legends while others have symbolic significance like the Triumph of Labour statue. The statues along the promenade are (from north to south):[47][48]
Robert Caldwell (erected on 2 January 1968)
Kambar (erected on 2 January 1968)
Ilango Adigal (erected on 7 November 1971)
Triumph of Labor (erected on 25 January 1959)
Bharathiyar (erected on 2 January 1968)
Kannagi statue (erected on 2 January 1968/re-erected on 3 June 2006)
Subhas Chandra Bose (erected on 15 December 1997)
Thiruvalluvar (erected on 2 January 1968)
George Uglow Pope (erected on 2 January 1968)
Annie Besant
Bharathidasan (erected on 2 January 1968)
Swami Vivekananda (erected on 12 July 1964)
Avvaiyar (erected on 2 January 1968)
Mahatma Gandhi (erected on 14 April 1959)
Veerama Munivar (erected on 2 January 1968)
Kamaraj
Periyar E. V. Ramasamy
Annie Besant statue
Avvaiyaar statue
Barathidasan statue
Bharathiyar statue
Fishermen at the Buckingham Canal statue
George Uglow Pope statue
Ilangovadigal statue
Kambar statue
Kannagi statue
Mahatma Gandhi statue
Subhas Chandra Bose statue
Robert Caldwell statue
Vivekanandar statue
Triumph of Labour statue
Thiruvalluvar statue
Thilagar Thidal plaque
Kamaraj statue
Golden Jubilee of Independence memorial pillar
Earlier present near Gandhi statue traffic island was a statue for Sivaji Ganesan, which was erected on 21 July 2006.[49] Following a court order, it was shifted on 3 August 2017[50] to a newly built memorial[51] at Adyar.
Marina Swimming Pool
The other side of the road houses several historical buildings and institutions including the Chepauk Cricket Stadium, the University of Madras, the Presidency College, Vivekananda House, Queen Mary's College, Inspector General of Police Headquarters, All India Radio—Chennai, Dr. Annie Besant Park.
Renovation[edit]
Promenade leading to the lighthouse
One of the several decorative installations at the beach
The beach has 14 landscaped galleries
In February 2008, the Chennai Corporation, previously known as The Madras Corporation, took up the Marina Renovation Project with improved landscaping, seating arrangements, walkways, and lighting along the promenade, and architectural elements such as plazas, gazeboes, and pergolas were installed all along the stretch including 4 m-wide non-slippery granite footpaths near the service lane, another 5 m-wide footpath, and 15 m-wide lawns. The blueprint of the renovation project included ornamental fountains, exclusive parking lots for two- and four-wheelers, a children's play area, bus shelters, ramps for physically challenged, and food courts.[52] The whole length of the stretch from Triumph of Labor Statue to the Lighthouse measuring 3.1 km has been divided into 14 harmonious landscaped galleries dotting its span, each with an element of drama attached to the design in the form of small theatre-type galleries where visitors can sit.
All the 14 sections vary significantly from one another and were designed in such a way as to the differentiation of sections not leading to any break in the walkway, which is a continuous walking stretch from the Triumph of Labor Statue to the Kamaraj Statue.[53] One of these galleries is flanked by two semi-circular stainless-steel pergolas resting on wire-cut brick columns. The galleries can accommodate over 1,000 people. The choice of natural stones and pillars used in each section of the promenade was based on the type of the buildings on the other side of the road. The walkway was designed as low-lying as is necessary to have a clear view of the beach from the road. A total of 428 octagonal poles with seagull-shaped light fittings and additional high-mast lamps have been erected.
Ten modern stainless steel bus shelters have been erected near the beach.[7] There is a skating rink behind the Gandhi Statue which has been improved with hand rails and tiles on the periphery under the project. A total of 14 galleries with seating arrangements and a 4-m internal walkway along the sands and fountains have been created on the 3.1-kilometre (1.9 mi) stretch from the Anna Square to the Lighthouse.[21] This stretch has uninterrupted pavement and a sub-road parallel to the main road. Five reverse osmosis plants capable of providing 30,000 liters of drinking water an hour free of cost to visitors is under construction.[7] As part of the beautification project, the decade-old 250-watt lamps were replaced with 690 anti-corrosive lamps along Kamaraj Salai and the service road.[52] The renovation was completed in December 2009 at a cost of ₹ 259.2 million. Although initially the corporation planned to outsource security personnel to protect the renovated structures,[54] the plan was dropped and about 50 corporation staff were employed to man the stretch.[55]
In 2009, a 4.5-km-long stretch along the beach was announced plastic-free zone, prohibiting the sale and use of plastic.[52][56] In November 2010, the corporation imposed a fine of ₹ 100 on the usage of plastic items that are less than 20 µm thick on the entire stretch. Within a couple of years since the ban, the use of plastics on the beach was reduced by 70 percent.[32]
In 2012, the government allotted ₹ 89 million for the renovation of the memorials of Anna and M.G.R. This include ₹ 12 million and ₹ 43 million towards renovation of Anna Memorial and M.G.R. and Amma Memorial, respectively, ₹ 34 million towards additional construction at the M.G.R. and Amma Memorial.[57]
In 2012, the corporation allotted ₹ 48.4 million for installing two high-mast lamps, a police watchtower, and a giant chess board and an interactive fountain in the children's play area. This also includes relocation of the shops to specific locations on the sand at a cost of ₹ 41.2 million.[58][59]
In 2017, plans to revamp the beach under the Swadesh Darshan scheme of the Indian government at a cost of ₹ 500 million have been drawn.[60]
Panoramic view stretch of the sandy Marina beach
Safety measures and policing[edit]
The Marina continues to remain the most dangerous place to bathe or swim, recording the highest number of drownings in the state of Tamil Nadu.[61] Bathing and swimming are illegal at Marina beach since the undercurrent in the region is very strong,[62] and there are no lifeguards stationed here. As many people throng the beach, quite often there are drowning mishaps. An estimated five sea-bathers are drowned every month at the beach, and most of the swimmers are dragged by the tides into the debris of a tramp ship SS Damatis that sank off the beach during a cyclone in 1966.[63] Police personnel and lifeguards constantly patrol the whole area, which is divided into seventy-two sections,[9] by means of horses and all-terrain vehicles (known as beach buggies).[64] Five spots off the beach, including near the Anna Square, Kannagi Statue, Triumph of Labor Statue and behind Vivekananda House, have been identified by the police as extremely unsafe due to the presence of whirlpools and rock projections in the seabed. In 2010, 75 people drowned in the sea along the 5-km stretch of the beach.[8] Of this, the 1-km stretch from Anna Square to the Anna swimming pool is considered the most dangerous with as many as 29 persons drowning in the sea in 2010. The deep sea in this stretch is considered to still hold parts of the smacked ship.[65] In 2011, in addition to the tie-up with Coast Guard security personnel, the city police planned for a tie-up with the fire and rescue services department to provide a stand-by rescue team at the beach to save people from drowning. The rescue team, equipped with a rubber boat and a motor-fitted boat, was planned to be stationed at the Anna Square police station or the Marina police station.[66]
A catamaran on the beach
The law-enforcing agencies is planning to bring the beach under close watch by means of two watchtowers and at least a dozen surveillance cameras. The Chennai Corporation has agreed in principle to create the security infrastructure based on a proposal sent by the Greater Chennai Police. The watchtowers are proposed to be erected behind the Triumph of Labour statue and the Gandhi statue.[67] In August 2012, the government sanctioned six more all-terrain vehicles for patrolling the beach.[68]
In December 2012, in a measure to regulate parking and to control the entry of vehicles into the beach, the Chennai Corporation decided to install drop gates at seven entry points on the beach's service lane, including near the PWD Building, Subash Chandra Bose statue, Dr. Annie Besant statue, Vivekanandar Illam, Avvaiyar statue, Veeramamunivar statue and the lighthouse.[69]
Despite intensive patrolling, illegal bike races and night races are also held along the stretch, resulting in public nuisances and, at times, death of the racers.[70]
Controversies[edit]
Crowd at the beach in the evening
With a length of 13 km, including a 6 km promenade, the Marina is considered the world's second longest urban beach,[17][71] although there exist in fact several longer beaches, including Praia do Cassino (254 km) in Brazil, Cox's Bazar (120 km) in Bangladesh, Padre Island on the U.S. Gulf Coast, Ninety Mile Beach in Australia and Ninety Mile Beach (88 km) in New Zealand. However, unlike most beaches, Marina is a natural sandy urban beach[72][73] similar to the Copacabana beach in Rio de Janeiro, helping it earn the title.
In December 2001, the Kannagi statue, which was erected in 1968 on the occasion of a World Tamil Conference held in Chennai, was removed for traffic maintenance reason[74] as part of modernization of the beach, which led to a huge protest and demonstration by the opposition Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) party. When the DMK later came to power, the statue was installed in the same place on 3 June 2006 by the DMK party chief M. Karunanidhi.[75][76][77]
On 9 August 2003, an open-air stage located 350 ft from the sea[78] on the sands of the Marina called Seerani Arangam, constructed in 1970,[79] which was used by religious groups and political parties to address gatherings, was demolished by the state government in order to modernise the beach. This spot was a place where rallies were held for the freedom movement during the British Raj, and the stage was considered a symbol of the historical events that had taken place in the Marina.[80][81] This created a great controversy.
Incidents[edit]
In 1966, a tramp ship SS Damatis sank near the Marina due to a cyclone in the region.[63]
The Marina Beach after the tsunami
The beachfront was severely damaged by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. The tsunami waves, caused due to an M 9.2 magnitude earthquake at about 257 km south-southeast of Banda Aceh, Sumatra, Indonesia, on the Indian Ocean floor on 26 December 2004 at 6.20 am IST, struck the beach, which is about 2028 km North West from the epicentre, at 8.40 am IST. The reported height of the tsunami waves at the beach was 6 m[82] which washed away about 206 persons on the beach,[83][84][85] most of whom were morning joggers and children playing cricket on the beach, including a few tourists.[86] With the assistance of the World Bank, the government built 2,000 temporary Marina beach shelters each measuring about 250 sq.ft. to house families affected by the tsunami at a cost of ₹ 172.3 million.[87] However, in 2012, new houses for residents of tenements on the Marina Beach was planned to be taken up under a Disaster Preparedness Project of the state government.[88]
Rescue operations at the beach after the tsunami
As a visible change in the beach immediately after the tsunami, the intertidal area was much flatter on 27 December 2004, which usually featured a gentle slope. However, the usual slope started to appear 4 days after the tsunami and normal profile was restored in about 15 days. The receding wave after the tsunami lasted for more than 24 h. Post tsunami, there was a distinct variation in the distribution of sand grains in the beach until the 4th day. However, from the 5th day after the tsunami, normal composition of sand grains appeared to have been restored at different depths.[28] The tsunami also resulted in various geomorphological changes in the region such as those in the contour of the 2,000 km-long Burma Plate, which sits atop the India plate, resulting in a rise in the land level of Chennai, ranging between 0.5 cm and 3 cm.[89]
Following the tsunami, there was a distinct increase in the meiofaunal density in the beach. Various meiofauna found in the beach after tsunami include foraminiferans (Elphidium sp.), cnidarians (Halammohydra sp., Psammohydra sp.), turbellarians (Otoplana sp., Macrostomum sp.), nemertines, nematodes (Halalaimus setosus, Desmodora sp., Chromadora sp., Sabatieria sp., Steineria sp., Metapselionema sp.), gastrotrichs (Chaetonotus sp., Thaumastoderma sp.), rotifers, kinorhynchs (Cateria sp.), polychaetes (Hesionides sp.), archiannelids (Polygordius madrasensis, Saccocirrus minor), oligochaetes (Marionina sp.), harpacticiod copepods (Arenosetella indica, Psammastacus acuticaudatus, Leptastacus euryhalinus, Emertonia minuta, Sewellina reductus), ostracods (Polycope sp.), isopods (Angeliera phreaticola), halacarids (Halacarus sp.), insects, and various other species.[28]
Jallikattu protest at Marina Beach
Marina Beach was also the venue of the 2017 pro-Jallikattu protests. The mass gathering of more than a million people in protest of the ban on the traditional bull-fighting sport Jallikattu at the Marina beach in Chennai for 10 consecutive days turned several eyes on the city's beach from across the nation. The leader-less movement grew much bigger as protests began in other cities across the country and later by Tamils in 15 countries including United States of America, UK, China, Japan and Singapore.[90] The protest came to end only after the ban was revoked after the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 was amended by the state government to allow the sport.
Events[edit]
Immersion of Ganesh idols on the Marina at Foreshore Estate
Being the most prominent open space in the city, the Marina Beach hosts several events throughout the year. The annual Independence Day and the Republic Day ceremonial parades and airshows are held along the promenade along with the unfurling of the national flag in the Marina. The annual idol-immersion event following the Hindu festival of Vinayaka Chathurthi takes place at the beach where most of the idols of Lord Ganesh kept on display during the festival in the city is immersed into the sea. The event occurs in the month of August–September. The beach is also the venue for several marathon and walkathon campaigns throughout the year conducted for various cause.
The beach receives the maximum number of visitors on the Kannum Pongal day, a day in the festival season of Pongal in mid-January, when about 150,000 people come to the beach.[91]
The annual Chennai Marathon managed by Chennai Runners is held in the beach starting from the Anna Square to Annai Velankanni Church on the Elliot's Beach in Besant Nagar. It is India's biggest city marathon and is also said to be South India's richest marathon, in which over 1,000 athletes and more than 20,000 people participate, which includes various categories such as a 21-km run for professional athletes, a city run for everybody, a junior run for children, a master's run for senior citizens and a wheelchair run for the disabled.[92]
From 2016, the Marina Runner Marathon managed by Marina Runner Running Group is held every year in the last weekend of February, this event prides itself on promoting running along Marina Beach, the second longest Urban beach in the world.
In 2008, the beach played host to India's first International Beach Volleyball Championship, BSNL FIVB Chennai Challenger:2008, from 15 to 20 July to popularize beach volleyball. The event was organized by the Beach Volleyball Club and was sponsored by Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited. Eleven Indian teams along with 60 teams from 21 countries participated in the 6-day-long tournament offering a total prize money of US$40,000 in the men's and US$6,400 in the women's events.[93][94]
In March 2016, "My leader" campaign was launched in this historical place. The main focus of this event was to attract youngsters to take up politics.
Survival Instincts provides mission briefing to Navy, Coast Guard, and Police Coastal security group.
From 2014, Tsunami [95] and Anti-terrorism Drills have been conducted at the beach[96] by Survival Instincts jointly with Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Tamil Nadu Disaster Management Authority, and Tamil Nadu Police Coastal Security Group.
Transportation[edit]
Kamaraj Salai running along the beach
Kamaraj Salai, a six-lane road and one of the arterial roads of Chennai City, runs alongside the beach providing a sea view starting from the Victory War Memorial near the Cooum River delta till the lighthouse to the south. The road extends further south beyond the lighthouse where it is known as the 'Santhome High Road', running away from the sea but parallel to the beach until Santhome. The Metropolitan Transport Corporation has a terminus called the 'Anna Square' terminus at the northern end of the beach, Triplicane Terminus near Kannagi statue/Pycrofts Road, Vivekananda House (Ice House) Terminus and Foreshore Estate terminus. Railway stations alongside the beach include the Chepauk, the Tiruvallikeni and the Lighthouse MRTS railway stations. The Poonamallee–Lighthouse (Line 4) section of the Chennai Metro (Phase II) under construction will connect the beach with other parts of the city.
There was a plan to build a 9.7-km elevated road along the beach connecting the lighthouse with the East Coast Road in the south at a cost of ₹ 10,000 million. However, the plan was dropped due to opposition from the public such as the 'Save Chennai Beaches' campaign.[97]
Legacy[edit]
The pedestrian path along the beach
Although the beach promenade was created in 1884, the sandy shore has been mentioned in the literature much earlier. The beach shore has a mentioning in the verse no. 2297 of the 4000 Divya Prabandham written by Peyalwar. The verse, dating back to 7th century CE, was written in Tamil, and it says that the sea was so rich with white waves bringing to the shore very precious gems like red corals and white pearls and that the light of the dusk (moonlight) falls on these gems at the shore and makes the area brightened with beautiful colors.[20]
Grant Duff, the governor of Madras who developed the beach promenade, recalls in his memoirs:
Our way lay first along the shore and made me think of the very sensible answer made to me when I was talking about going to India. 'Go', he said, 'For God's sake go. If you spend only twelve hours on the beach at Madras, it will be a great deal better than nothing'.[12]
Grant Duff christened it the Madras Marina in 1884, the same year when the beach promenade was created,[12] on which he explains in a letter:
We have greatly benefited Madras by turning the rather dismal beach of five years ago into one of the most beautiful promenades in the world. From old Sicilian recollections, I gave in 1884 to our new creation the name of Marina; and I was not a little amused when walking there last winter with the Italian General Saletta, he suddenly said to me 'On se dirai a Palerme'.[13]
In New India, the newspaper that was run by Annie Besant, the Irish theosophist and Home Rule advocate, the beauty of Marina Beach was described back in 1914. On 6 October 1914, Anne Besant wrote,[98]
One of the chief attractions of Madras is undeniably its Marina. There is nothing in all of India to match this long and pleasantest of promenades that runs by the side of the foam-crested surf from the southern extremity of the Fort to Santhome. The Marina is certainly a cap of this 'city of magnificent distances'. An old promenade, popularly known as 'Cupid's Bow' south of the fort, now hides her head in shame besides her statelier and more favoured sister.
She also added that Madras[98]
... in keeping with her dignity as a progressive city with a population of over half a million souls, (its) delectable evening resort, Marina Beach will be converted into being 'a thing of beauty and joy forever'.
Future developments[edit]
View of the beach from the lighthouse
Southern stretch of the beach, south of the lighthouse
In January 2014, the corporation announced a makeover of the 2.8-km stretch on the southern part of the beach from Lighthouse to Foreshore Estate, including development of walkways, benches, a gallery, bicycle tracks, concrete roads, service trenches, rainwater trenches and streetlight fittings at an estimated cost of ₹ 400 million. The development would provide alternative accommodation to vendors of the existing market on the Marina Loop Road by commissioning of a modern fish market on the stretch. The loop road connecting the Lighthouse and Foreshore Estate, which is currently a 20-metre-wide road, will be converted to a four-lane concrete road barricaded on both sides with stainless steel pillared railings and will pass all along the Santhome coast of the Marina Beach. A 2.4-metre-wide bicycle track, a 3.3-metre-wide walkway and a 2.5-metre-wide gallery will be developed on the eastern side of the road. The western side of the road will have a fish market with cold storage facilities as well as a walkway.[99]
The corporation also plans to develop more than 300 heritage pillars, each 1.2 meters tall, on the western side of Kamaraj Salai opposite the beach. The uniformly designed heritage pillars will be made of granite and iron on the stretch from All India Radio to Swami Sivananda Salai. The pillars would replace the existing walls of various institutions to improve aesthetics around the beach.[99] In 2018, the Corporation revealed plans to make the beach disabled-friendly.[100]
As of 2019, the Greater Chennai Corporation was exploring the feasibility of conducting water sports on the Marina beach.[45]
In popular culture[edit]
Marina Beach has been featured in numerous Tamil movies, including the 2012 Tamil movie Marina that is entirely based upon the lives of child workers in the beach. The entire story and screenplay for the comedy hit film Kadhalikka Neramillai were conceived on Marina Beach and the "Enna Paarvai" song sequence in the film was filmed in this beach.

For other uses, see Mylapore (disambiguation).
Mylapore
Neighbourhood
Show map of Chennai
Show map of Tamil Nadu
Show map of India
Show all
Coordinates: 13.0368°N 80.2676°E
Country India
State Tamil Nadu
District Chennai District
Metro Chennai
Ward 147
Talukas Mylapore
Government
 • Body CMDA
Area
 • Total 3.914 km2 (1.511 sq mi)
Elevation 53 m (174 ft)
Demonym Mylapoorans
Languages
 • Official Tamil
Time zone UTC+5:30 (IST)
PIN
600 004
Vehicle registration TN-06
Lok Sabha constituency South Chennai
Vidhan Sabha constituency Mylapore[1][2]
Planning agency CMDA
Website www.chennai.tn.nic.in
Mylapore (also spelt Mayilapur[note 1]), or Thirumayilai,[3] is a neighbourhood in the central part of the city of Chennai, India. It is one of the oldest residential parts of the city. The locality is claimed to be the birthplace of the celebrated Tamil philosopher Valluvar, and the Hindu saint and philosopher, Peyalvar.[citation needed]
Mylapore is known for its tree-lined avenues, Kapaleeshwarar Temple, Katcheri seasons, and Ramakrishna Matha among many others.[4] St. Thomas Cathedral Basilica, Chennai which is believed to house the tomb of Thomas the Apostle, is in Mylapore.[5][6][7][8]
Etymology[edit]
The word Mylapore is the anglicized form of the Dravidian word Mayilāppūr. It is derived from the Tamil phrase மயில் ஆர்ப்பரிக்கும் ஊர் Mayil ārpparikkum ūr, which means 'land of the peacock scream'.[9] Historically, peacocks have been known to thrive in the area, which is evident from the several statues in the Kapaleeshwarar Temple towers and in the emblem of the San Thome Basilica. Thirugnanasambandar has also mentioned mayil (peacocks) in his songs in Tevaram. Mylapore is also known as Thirumayilai.[citation needed]
History[edit]
Mylapore is an ancient settlement. It was historically known as Vedapuri. As the available historical and archaeological evidence show, it could well be the oldest part of Chennai, with written records of early settlements going back to the first century BCE. Thiruvalluvar, the Tamil poet-philosopher, is believed to have been born here in 31 BCE.[10] It was known for its ancient port with a flourishing trade with the Roman Empire, receiving gold in exchange for its products like pepper and fine cloth. St. Thomas the Apostle allegedly died at Mylapore in 72 CE.[5][6][7][8] Ptolemy had recorded in the second century CE that the port of Mylapore was known to the Greeks and the Romans, but does not mention any thing about St. Thomas or Christians. The Saivite Saints of the seventh century, Saint Sambandar and Saint Appar, have sung about the shrine in their hymns. Mention has been made of the early settlement of Santhome (currently known) by Arab travelers and merchants of the ninth and tenth centuries. Marco Polo visited the place in the late 13th century and left a detailed description of the land, the people along with their customs and religion and also visited the tomb of Saint Thomas the Apostle in Mylapore (currently Santhome).[11]
It was considerable maritime time and the ancient German and Greek maps refer to the town as 'Maliarpha'. The later Scottish researchers like James Playfair referred it "Meliapour"[12][13] Mylapore was occupied by the Portuguese in 1523, who established the viceroyalty of "São Tomé de Meliapor" or "Saint Thomas of Mylapore." Portuguese rule lasted until 1749, except for a brief interregnum between 1662 and 1687, when the town was occupied by the Dutch.
After 1749, the British East India Company took possession of the settlement in the name of Muhammad Ali Khan Wallajah, the Nawab of Arcot.[14] In that same year, Mylapore was incorporated into the administration of the Presidency of Madras. The settlement known as "Luz" developed during this period. The name finds its origins from the 'Nossa Senhora Da Luz' (Our Lady of Light) church built by the Portuguese in 1516 CE. This church is one of the oldest standing Christian structures in all of Tamil Nadu.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries the town became the commercial and intellectual hub of Madras city and home to British-educated lawyers and statesmen, the most elite of whom formed the Mylapore clique.[15][16][17] Some of the luminaries based in Mylapore included Sir V. Bhashyam Aiyangar, Sir S. Subramania Iyer, Sir T. Madhava Rao, Eardley Norton, Sir P. S. Sivaswami Iyer, Pennathur Subramania Iyer, V. Krishnaswamy Iyer, and Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer.

H Bhimasena Rau, C S Rama Rao Sahib, Subanthore Vasudeva Rao, CR Krishnaswamy Rao Sahib, and the civil engineer C R Narayana Rao.
Location[edit]
Kapaleeshwarar Temple water tank during a sunset
Mylapore is located a few kilometres to the south of the British-built Chennai city. The neighborhood is bordered by Triplicane in the north, Royapettah in the northwest, Alwarpet in the west, and Mandaveli in the south. The Bay of Bengal coast is in the east of Mylapore. It extends for around 4 km from north to south and 2 km from east to west.[citation needed]
Demographics[edit]
The population of Mylapore is estimated to be around 150,000 to 300,000.[18] It has long been a site of cultural importance for Brahmins, which can be attributed to Mylapore's early role as a temple centre. Smartha Brahmins, a sub-sect, were one of the first people to settle in this township.[citation needed] More accurate statistics are not available as Mylapore is not a separate township by itself, but a part of Chennai city. The different neighbourhoods within Mylapore have been distributed among the different wards of the Chennai Corporation.[citation needed]
Notable people[edit]
Peyalvar, one of the twelve alvar saints of South India, in held in popular tradition to have been found in the lily flower in the pond of the Adi Kesava Perumal Temple in Mylapore in 4203 BCE.[19]
Valluvar, the Tamil poet philosopher and the author of the Tirukkural, was born in Mylapore in 31 BCE.[10]
According to legends, St. Thomas the Apostle attained martyrdom at Parangimalai in south Chennai in 72 CE.[5][8] San Thome Basilica is built over his original tomb in Mylapore. His relics were moved to Edessa in the third century.[20]
Important places[edit]
Kapaleeswarar Temple
Entrance of the Universal Temple
A temple for Thiruvalluvar in Mylapore
St. Thomas Cathedral Basilica, Chennai
Mylapore is known for its cultural and religious heritage. Mylapore is home to hundreds of temples, churches and mosques.[citation needed]
Kapaleeswarar Temple[edit]
Kapaleeswarar Temple is one of the most famous temples of Chennai. Originally temple relocated by the Tuluva dynasty (1491–1570 CE) from sea shore of Mylapore. The main deity of the temple is Shiva. The temple exhibits exquisite Dravidian architecture. The huge temple is surrounded by traditional crowded street markets of Chennai selling fruits, flowers, vegetables and traditional brass ware.[citation needed]
Adi Kesava Perumal Temple[edit]
Mylapore is known for the Adi Kesava Perumal Temple constructed in honor of Keshava or Vishnu, a principal god in the Hindu pantheon and the "Preserver" in the Hindu trinity. The temple has an idol of Vishnu accompanied by his celestial consort Goddess Lakshmi. This is the birthplace of Peyalvar. It has sannathis for the thayar Mayuravalli, Chakkarathalvar, Sri Andal, Sri Rama & Anjaneya. It is the avatara sthalam (birthplace) of Peyalvar and has a separate sannithi for the Alvar. During the brahmotsavam the utsavar goes in a procession accompanied by Sridevi & Bhudevi in the mada streets and also gives the chance to see the Theppam festival in the centuries-old kulam (tank). Every year the Parthasarathy Perumal comes to the Kesava Perumal temple and Kesava Perumal too goes to Triplicane along with Peyalvar.[21]
Sri Vedantha Desikar Devasthanam/Sri Srinivasar Koil[edit]
Mylapore has the Srinivasar temple near Chitra Kulam in Mylapore, which is administered by the Vedantha Desikar Devasthanam (SVDD). It is located beside the Adi Kesava Perumal Temple, which has an imposing gopuram that can be seen from quite a distance.
Valluvar Koil[edit]
The Ekambareswarar–Kamakshi Koil, commonly known as the Valluvar Koil, is also located in the neighborhood. The Valluvar shrine is located within the Ekambareswarar temple complex and is dedicated to the poet-saint Valluvar. Dating back to at least the early 16th century, the temple was extensively renovated in the 1970s.[22] Considered to be the birthplace of Valluvar, the temple is the oldest ever built to Valluvar. The temple also serves as the venue for meetings of Tamil language enthusiasts. While many consider the temple as the birthplace of Valluvar, some consider it as his samadhi (place of cremation).
Madhava Perumal Temple[edit]
Madhava Perumal Temple is dedicated to Hindu god Vishnu. Constructed in the Dravidian style of architecture, dedicated to Vishnu, who is worshiped as Madhava Perumal and his consort Lakshmi as Amirtagadavalli. According to some, the temple is believed to be the birthplace of Peyalvar, one of the first three of the twelve Alvar saints of the sixth to ninth century CE.[citation needed]
Ramakrishna Math[edit]
Sri Ramakrishna Mutt, is the oldest center of the Ramakrishna Order in the South India. Sri Ramakrishna is the main deity of the temple. Architecture of the temple is a blend of Hindu, Islamic, Buddhist, Rajput, and Christian styles. The sprawling campus contains several huge quiet halls for dhyana, the Sanskrit word for meditation. The book store on the campus sells books on Indian epics - Ramayana and Mahabharatha, talks, travels and works of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and Swami Vivekananda, as well as the philosophy of Vedanta along with monthly magazines. The monks conduct lectures and interviews in English on Sunday evenings from 5:30 PM to 6:30 PM.[23]
San Thome Basilica[edit]
San Thome Basilica, built over the tomb of Thomas the Apostle, is a Roman Catholic minor basilica at Santhome in the city of Chennai. Thomas is traditionally believed to have sailed to Muziris in modern-day Kerala India in 52 CE.[8][24] The Saint Thomas Christians or Nasrani Christians of Kerala are believed to have been converted by St Thomas. Tradition has it that Thomas was killed in 72 CE at Mylapore and his body was interred here. His relics were moved to Edessa in the third century. San Thome Basilica was built over his original tomb in the 16th century by Portuguese explorers, and rebuilt with the status of a cathedral by the British in 1893 which still stands.[6] San Thome Basilica is the principal church of the Madras-Mylapore Roman Catholic Archdiocese. In 1956, Pope Pius XII raised the church to the status of a Minor Basilica, and on 11 February 2006, it was declared a national shrine by the Catholic Bishops' Conference of India. It is an important pilgrimage center for the Syrian Christians of Kerala. The church also has an attached museum.[25]
Luz Church[edit]
Church of Our Lady of Light is a Roman Catholic shrine in the locality. It is commonly called as Luz Church by the locals, which derives from the Portuguese name Nossa Senhora da Luz. Built in 1516 by the Portuguese, it is one of the oldest Churches in the city and its foundation stone marks as one of the oldest European monuments in India. The history of the church dates back to the 16th-century legend of safe arrival to land by missionaries. The church is located very near to the Santhome Basilica, where Apostle Thomas is believed to be buried.[citation needed]
Although at the time the church was built, the locality was a thick forest, now it is part of a bustling metropolitan area. This 16th century European architecture building consists of patterns of Gothic arches and Baroque ornamentation. The feast of Our Lady of Light is celebrated on 15 August every year.[citation needed]
Other places[edit]
Saptha Sthaana Shiva Temples, 1. Sri Karaneeswarar Temple; 2. Sri Theerthapaleeswarar Temple; 3. Sri Velleeswarar Temple; 4. Sri Virupaksheeswarar Temple; 5. Sri Valeeswarar Temple; 6. Sri Malleeswarar Temple; 7. Sri Kapaleeswarar Temple.
Veera Anjaneyar Temple, near Luz
Madras Music Academy
Vivekananda College
Lighthouse, Chennai
Culture[edit]
Convention of the Mylai Tamizh Sangam, early 1900s
Kapaleeswarar Temple Theppam Festival

This article is about the temple in Chennai. For the temple in Aranmula, Kerala, see Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple.
Parthasarathy Perumal Temple
Thiruvallikēñi Venkatakrishna Parathasarathy Perumal Thirukoil
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District Chennai
Deity Sri Venkatakrishnan (Moolavar),
Sri Parthasarathy (Urchavar)
Sri Vedavalli Thaayar
Festivals Panguni Serthi, Pallava Utsavam, Ramanujar Utsavam, Vaikunda Ekadashi, Every Friday Sri Vedavalli Thayar Purappadu
Location
Location Thiruvallikeni
State Tamil Nadu
Country India
Parthasarathy Temple, Triplicane, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Geographic coordinates 13.05395°N 80.27675°E
Architecture
Type Dravidian architecture
Creator Pallavas[1]
Completed 6th century AD[1]
Part of a series on
Vaishnavism
show
Supreme deity
show
Important deities
show
Holy scriptures
show
Sampradayas
show
Teachers—acharyas
show
Related traditions
vte
The Parthasarathy Temple is a 6th-century Hindu Vaishnavite temple dedicated to Vishnu in Chennai, India. Located in the neighbourhood of Thiruvallikeni, the temple is glorified in the Naalayira Divya Prabandham, the early medieval Tamil literature canon of the Alvar saints from the 6th to 9th centuries CE and is classified as among the 108 Divya Desams dedicated to Vishnu.[2] The name 'Parthasarathy' means the 'charioteer of Arjuna', referring to Krishna's role as a charioteer to Arjuna in the epic Mahabharata.
It was originally built by the Pallavas in the 6th century[3] by king Narasimhavarman I. The temple has icons of five forms of Vishnu: Yoga Narasimha, Rama, Gajendra Varadaraja, Ranganatha, and Krishna as Parthasarathy.[4] The temple is one of the oldest structures in Chennai.[5][6][7][8][9] There are shrines for Vedavalli Thayar, Ranganatha, Rama, Gajendra Varadar, Narasimha, Andal, Hanuman, Alvars, Ramanuja, Swami Manavala Mamunigal and Vedanthachariar. The temple subscribes to Vaikhanasa agama and follows Tenkalai tradition. There are separate entrances and dhvajastambhas for the Parthasarathy and Yoga Narasimha temples. The gopuram (towers) and mandapas (pillars) are decorated with elaborate carvings,[9] a standard feature of South Indian Temple Architecture.
Legend[edit]
As per Hindu legend, the Saptarishis, the seven sages worshipped five deities Panchaveeras, namely, Venkata Krishnaswamy, Rukmini, Satyaki, Balarama, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha. As per the Mahabharata, Vishnu, in his avatar as Krishna was acting as charioteer for Arjuna, the Pandava prince during the war with Kauravas. Krishna did not take any weapons during the war. During the fight between Arjuna and Bhishma, Krishna was injured by the arrow from Bhishma. The mark in the image in the temple is believed to follow the legend.[10] The place is called Allikeni, meaning a pond of lily as it is believed that historically the place was full of lily ponds. The place is the only place where the presiding deity is sported with a moustache.[11] As per another legend, the place was once a tulasi forest. A Chola king named Sumati wanted to see Vishnu in the form of Parthasarathy and prayed at Srinivasa temple in Tirupati. Srinivasa directed the king to visit the temple here built by sage Atreya and worshipped with another sage called Sumati.[11]
History[edit]
The temple was originally built by the Pallavas Between the 6th and 8th century, subsequently expanded by Cholas and later by the Vijayanagara kings in the 15th century.[2][12] The temple has several inscriptions dating from the 8th century in Tamil[2] presumably from the period of Dantivarman, who was a Vishnu devotee.[13] Thirumangai Alvar, the 8th-century poet-saint also attributes the building of temple to the Pallava king.[14][13] From the internal references of the temple, it appears that the temple was restored during 1564 CE when new shrines were built.[15] In later years, endowments of villages and gardens have enriched the temple.[15] The temple also has inscriptions about the Pallava king, Nandivarman of the 8th Century.[16] One of the earliest Alvars Pey Alvar (who lived between 5th and 6th Century)[17] has mentioned this temple which makes the temple the oldest structure in Chennai.
The temple was extensively built during the Chola period and a lot of inscriptions dating back to the same period are found here. The outer most mandapam is replete with sculptures of various forms of Vishnu, especially the avatars. One can also see inscriptions of Dantivarma Pallava of the 8th century, Chola and Vijayanagara in the temple. The first architectural expansion of the temple took place during the reign of the Pallavas (Tondaiyar Kon) as vividly described by Tirumangai Alvar. Reminiscent of this is the inscription of the Pallava King Dantivarman (796–847 CE), which is preserved in the temple.
The temple witnessed a major expansion during the rule of the Vijayanagara kings like Sadasiva Raya, Sriranga Raya and Venkatapati Raya II (16th century). Many subshrines and pillared pavilions (mandapas) like the Tiruvaymoli Mandapa were added.
A Pallava king built the present temple in the eighth century. The gopuram was also built by a Pallava king - Tondaiman Chakravarthy. There are inscriptions that record the contributions of the Chola kings Raja Raja and Kulottunga III, Pandya King Maravarman and many rulers of the Vijayanagara dynasty including Ramaraja Venkatapathiraja and Vira Venkatapathy. For a while the East India Company administered the temple.
The pushkarani is called Kairavani and five sacred teerthams are believed to surround the tank – Indra, Soma, Agni, Meena and Vishnu. Seven rishis – Bhrigu, Atri, Marichi, Markandeya, Sumati, Saptaroma and Jabali – performed penance here. All five deities in the temple have been extolled by Tirumangai Alvar.[18][19] There is also a separate shrine for Andal, one of the 12 Alvars who is also considered as a consort to the presiding deity.
It is one of the very few shrines in the country dedicated to Krishna as Parthasarathy, charioteer of Arjuna and to contains idols of three avatars of Vishnu: Narasimha, Rama, and Krishna.[4]
Unusually, he is depicted with a prominent moustache and carries a conch in his hand. Also unusual is the iconographical combination found in the sanctum. Here, Krishna is seen standing with consort Rukmini, elder brother Balarama, son Pradyumna, grandson Aniruddha and Satyaki. Because of the association of the temple with Krishna, Tiruvallikeni came to be regarded as the Southern Vrindavana.[16][20][21] He also mentioned about the Telliya Singar shrine within the temple.[13]
The temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu.[22]
Religious traditions[edit]
The temple is administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu.[9] The temple follows the traditions of the Thenkalai sect of Vaishnavite tradition and follows the Vaikhanasa Agama. The temple has grand brahmotsavams (big festival) for Parthasarathy during the Tamil month of Chittirai (April–May), on the same month Udayavar utsavam is also celebrated.[9]
As per Sri Pillailogam Jeeyar Swamy in his work "Ramanuja Divya Charithai" it is stated that Sri Asoori Kesava Somayaji, father of Ramanuja, performed Putrakaameshti Yagam at Kairavini the temple pond at Thiruvallikeni, and prayed to Parthasarathy to bless him with a son. Parthasarathy appeared in the dreams of Sri Asoori Kesava Somayaji and promised he will be born as his son to impart teachings of his Gita for the benefit of mankind. The Bhagavad Gita Bhāshya (a review and commentary on the Bhagavad Gita), was later written by Ramanuja. In conformity of the above tradition during the annual festival, unlike other Alvars and acharyas, Ramanuja has independent processions both in the morning and evening.
In the month of Vaikasi, the occasions of Sri Varadarajar utsavam, Sri Nammalvar utsavam (vaikasi-vishakam), and Vasantotsavam are celebrated,[9] while Aḻagiyasingar (Narasimha) is venerated during the Tamil month of Ani (June–July).[9] There are also festivals for Ramanuja (April–May) and Manavala Mamunigal (Oct-Nov) besides festivals for Alvars and acharyas.[9] The occasion of Vaikuntha Ekadashi during the Tamil month of Margaḻi (December–January) draws a lot of pilgrims.[9]
Parthasarathy Perumal Yaanai Vahanam
The temple in 1851
The temple's tower
Ranganathar statue on an entrance arch
Western entrance to the temple
Utsavams[edit]
Utsavams take place around the year in Parthasarathy temple. Urchavams (or utsavams), as these are termed, take place for a particular god at a particular period of time[23] in the year. It is a religious practise to carry the different gods of the temple through the mada veethis of triplicane during some of these festivals. The Gods will move in different religiously built temple vehicles (vaghanams, as these are termed in Tamil), like Elephant, Garuda, Horse, Yali (a mythical animal), Hamsa (Swan), Hanuman, temple Rath (ther in Tamil, chariot or Ratham, alternative terms), etc.[24]
The temple is administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu.[9] The temple follows the traditions of the Thenkalai sect of Vaishnavite tradition and follows vaikanasa aagama. The temple has grand brahmotsavams (big festival) for Parthasarathy swami during the Tamil month of Chittirai (April–May), on the same month Udayavar utsavam is also celebrated.
Parthasarathy Temple during Sri Vaikunda Ekaadasi festival
The following are the various festivals or utsavams in the Parthasarathy temple in different parts of the Tamil Calendar year.[25] During festival days the place is given a new look and accompanied by various traditional rites.
Traditional Tamil calendar month (Gregorian calendar months) Festival
Chittirai (April–May) Sri Brahma Utsavam (Brahmotsavam)[26][27]
Sri Udaiyar's Utsavam and Vidaiyatri
Vaikasi (May–June) Vasantotsavam
Sri Gajendra Varadaraja Swami Utsavam
Sri Ranganatha-Sri Vedavalli Tayar Utsavam
Ani (June–July) Sri Narasimha Swami Brahmotsavam
Kodai Utsavam
Adi (July–August) Sri Gajendra Moksham
Sri Parthasarathy Jyeshtabishekam
Tiru Pavadai Utsavam
Tiru Adi Puram
Jyeshtabhishekam
Avani (August–September) Pavitrotsavam
Krishna Jayanti (Krishna Janmashtami)
Puratasi (September–October) Navaratri
Vedavalli Tayar Laksharachana
Aippasi (October–November) Manavala Mamunigal Utsavam
Deepavali
Anna kuda utsavam
Kartikai (November–December) Kartikai Deepam
Taila Kapu
Margaḻi (December–January) Margaḻi Pagal Pattu
Vaikuntha Ekadashi
Ra Pattu
Tai (January–February) Laksharachana of Parthasarathy
Rathasaptami
Festival to Ekkatuthangal
Masi (February–March) Masi Magam
Teppam or Teppotsavam
Dhavana Utsavam
Panguni (March–April) Panguni Uttiram
Rama Navami
Statues on the gopuram
Statue depicting Krishna as Arjuna's charioteer
Eastern entrance arch near the coast on Beach Road
The most important among these festivals are the Vaikunda Ekadesi – as huge crowds from not only chennai, but also various parts of Tamil Nadu and India come to the temple on this day; Theppam or Thepotsavam – the colourful float festival, and the utsavam for the main deity Parthasarathy.
Theppam (Float) festival[edit]
Also known Teppothsavam (= Theppam + Utsavam), this pictorial and colourful festival takes place on 7 days in the Tamil month of masi, 3 days for Parthasarathy, one each for Sri Narasimhar, Sri Ranganathar, Sri Ramar and Sri Gajendra Varadhar. The seven-day event attracts a large number of devotees and onlookers from different parts of Chennai and Tamil Nadu.
A floating structure made up of drums, timber would be constructed and would be beautifully decorated with lights, flowers, religious paintings, silken buntings, etc. which serves as a visual delight. For better ambience, lights were also installed in the garden around the tank and additionally, focus lights were placed on the corners of the Neerazhi Mandapam (the Mandapam (structure) in the Center of the temple tank). Perumal (God) would come to the temple tank in Purappadu (departure) and be placed majestically inside the float. On all the days, the float completed five rounds around the Neerazhi Mandapam. After this, the deities were taken in a procession around the four Mada Streets.
Devotees in hundreds would converge and sit on the steps of the temple tank to have Darshan of the Lord on Theppam. The specialty of the third day function is the 'Thirumanjanam', performed to the deity inside the float. Other than the bhattachariars (temple priests), no one is allowed inside the float. A Rescue team of about 10 swimmers is usually provided by the Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services.[25][28][29]
This theppam festival exhibits one of the aspects of the richest cultural heritage aspects of Triplicane which one can see nowhere else in Chennai, other than Mylapore.
Incidents[edit]
The temple had internal conflict from the 1750s till the end of the century between the two subsects of Sri Vaishnavism, namely Tenkalai and Vadakalai.[30] The two sects were grounded over the right of reciting each of their own version of concluding verses in the temple.[30] A petition was received by the ruling British government to decide the religious dispute.[30] English records mention petition during the year 1754 filed by local inhabitants and merchants seeking to resolve the dispute.[30] They suggested that the Tenkalai Brahmins could recite their Srisailesadayaptram in the Parthasarathi shrine, while the Vadakalai Brahmins could recite their Ramanujadayapatram in the Telinga Singar shrine.[30] The council agreed that the suggestion in the petition be accepted and publicly announced.[30] There were further petitions in 1780 from the Tenkalai Brahmins that since the temple was built, recitals were made only in Srisailesadayaptram, which should continue.[30] It also asserted that the trustee Manali Muthukrishna Mudali favoured Vadakalai resulting in the issue.[30] While both the sects were claiming theirs should be the practice followed in the temple, the English administrators in India has deep rooted belief that old ways were the only solution to preserve tranquility.[30] The Tenkalai sect had the sanction of antiquity and custom resulting in Tenkalai gaining precedence.[30]
The bearers at the temple were traditionally fishermen of Triplicane.[31] During the temple festivities, they carry the festival idol in their sturdy shoulders in an atmosphere of wine and toddy shops.[31] They bargained for additional rights in the temple in 1928, which eventually ended their ties with the temple.[31]
Muthuswami Dikshitar, composer of Indian classical music, who is considered one of the musical Trinity of Carnatic music composed the song "Shri Parthasarathina pAlitOsmyaham" on this Kshethram.[32]
Bharathiar, the Tamil poet and independence activist was struck by an elephant at the temple, whom he used to feed regularly. Although he survived the incident, a few months later his health deteriorated and he died.
Swami Vivekananda, an Indian Hindu monk was a devotee of Parthasarathy. In one of his letters in the year 1893 to his disciple Alasinga, he writes 'Take a bow before Parthasarathy of Thiruvallikeni and give an undertaking before Him of a great sacrifice, one of a whole life for the poor, the lowly and the oppressed – for whom Parthasarathy comes from time to time and whom he loves above all.' You can find this letter to his disciple inscribed in one of the walls at temple corridor.[33]

Look for San Thome Church on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for San Thome Church in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "San Thome Church" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for T Nagar, Ranganathan Street on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for T Nagar, Ranganathan Street in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "T Nagar, Ranganathan Street" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Nexus Vijaya Mall
Location Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Coordinates 13.03°N 80.20°E
Address 189, NSK Salai, Arcot Road, Vadapalani
Developer Prestige Group
No. of stores and services 100[1]
No. of anchor tenants 10
Total retail floor area 650,000 sq ft (60,000 m2)[2]
Parking Basement & MLCP (3000 car parks)
Website www.nexusmalls.com/nexus-vijaya
Nexus Vijaya Mall is a shopping mall located in Vadapalani, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India, developed by Prestige Group.[3] This mall has approx 650,000 square feet of retail space.[2] More than 100 shops occupy its four floors. This mall distinguishes itself by being local by housing Chennai-based brands in the mall such as Spar Hypermarket, RmKV, Lifestyle, Max, Westside, Fab India and Via South.[4] It is also home to PVR Cinemas' Palazzo multiplex and an IMAX screen as well.
Shops[edit]
The Nexus Vijaya from the inside
In terms of shops, each floor has been categorized such as ground floor for formal wear, first floor for casual & ethnic wear, second floor for Electronic and Travel and third floor for cinemas and food court . Some of the branded shops in the mall are Lifestyle, Park Avenue, Louis Philipe, Arrow, Ruosh, Basics, Levi, Hidesign, Reebok, Nike, Adidas, Puma, Wildcraft, Soch, Indian Terrain, W, Jockey, Melange, Kalanikethan, Funskool, Van Heusen, Manyavar, US Polo Assn, UCB, Colorplus, Firstcry.com, Mothercare, HP, Lenovo, VIP, Witco, Bata, Gini&Jony.
More important Shops[edit]
Casio
Via South
Zebronics
Skechers
Sony
Vivo
Poorvika
ID
Mochi
Peter England
The Arvind Store
Veneto
Max
Biba
Flying machine
Global Desi
Health & Glow
IMAX
Nalli
RmKV
Galito's
SALT restaurant
Food Court
KFC restaurant
Femiga
Spar Hypermarket
PVR Palazzo
Zimson
Trends Women
House of Candy
ACT Fibernet
Fun City
Hamleys
Westside
McDonald's
Limelite
L'OREAL
Sneakers
Kerastase Paris
Entertainment[edit]
This mall houses an 09-screens multiplex from PVR Cinemas titled PVR Palazzo and also one IMAX screen, the second in the city.
Fun city a gaming and entertainment zone for kids located at level 3 and 4.
Forum Express, Kiddie Rides, VR Games etc.
Nexus Vijaya Mall - Central Atrium
Food and dining[edit]
Nexus Mall's food court named as Via South indicates that most of the food stalls here have southern blend into their food. This food court has an 650-seat capacity, and major F&B's like KFC, McDonald's, Junior Kuppanna, Galito's, Taco Bell, Burger King, Beijing Bites, Tuk Tuk, Dosa & co, Wow! Momo, Pandikadai, Arabian Hut, Vasanta Bhavan, Amaravathi, Tibbs Frankie, Ibaco, Squeez Juice Bars, Ibakes, Sandwich Square, Madras Coffee House, Domino's Pizza, Cookieman, Krispy Kreme, Cafe Coffee Day, Kalmane Koffees, Salt restaurant, Cream & Fudge, Subway, Bombaysthan, The Belgian Waffle Co, The pasta bar Venetto, ID, Cream centre are located in Nexus Vijaya mall.[4]
House of Candy, @ NEXUS VIJAYA, Shopping Mall, Vadapalani, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
Amenities[edit]
Info-desk
First aid
Wheelchairs
Reserved parking for differently abled and mothers to be
Restroom for differently abled
Babycare room
Baby prams
Cab station
Lost & Found
Car spa
ATM's
Free Wi-fi
Prayer room
Bike Spa
Premium Parking
Bag & Shoe repair
Palazzo Cinemas
JNR Road view
The Nexus Vijaya Mall, facing Arcot road, Chennai, (night view)
Inside The 'NEXUS VIJAYA', Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Look for VGP Snow Kingdom on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for VGP Snow Kingdom in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "VGP Snow Kingdom" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
VGP Universal Kingdom
Location Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Opened 1997
Owner VGP Group of Companies
Area East Coast Road, Chennai
VGP Universal Kingdom is an amusement park located in East Coast Road in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. The park offering small rides during the early days of its history became a full-fledged amusement park in 1997.[1] VGP Universal kingdom, spread over 44 acres provides several fun and adventure rides for children, youth and adults, including attractions such as Tamil Nadu's first Snow park, Petting Zoo, Beach Live Shows, Paneer fort, a massive water complex and more. VGP 2000 millennium tower, Water cascades, Paneer fort and statueman are some of the main attractions. The park is owned by VGP Group of Companies founded by V. G. Panneerdas and V.G.Ravidas is its managing director.
VGP Universal Kingdom now has two other entertainment zones nearby it, which have been recently developed.

Vadapalani Aandavar Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District Chennai
Deity Vadapalani Aandavar (Lord Muruga)
Location
Location Vadapalani
State Tamil Nadu
Country India
Location in Chennai
Geographic coordinates 13°03′10″N 80°12′49″E
Architecture
Type Dravidian architecture
Completed 1865
Elevation 55 m (180 ft)
Vadapalani Andavar Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Muruga. It is located in Vadapalani, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.[1] It was renovated in the 1920s and a Rajagopuram was built during that time. The temple has grown in popularity, which is believed to be in part due to the patronage of cinema stars.[2]
History[edit]
The temple started initially as a thatched hut where Murugan's ardent devotee Annaswami Nayakar kept a portrait of the God and worshipped him. The temple was built on the same site as the thatched hut around 1890. He was the founder and the first priest of the temple. The Vadapalani temple became famous because of the Arul Vaakku and the ability to foretell events, as Annaswami Nayakar's words carried the truth. The devotees believed his sacred words gave effective solutions to problems, including education, failure in examinations, marriage issues, ailments, and unemployment, among others. The disciple of Annaswami Nayakar, Rathinasamy Chettiyar continued the tradition and had the same divine energy and ability as Arul Vaakku. The temple underwent renovation in 1920, and over the past century, devotees throng the temple in huge numbers.
Main Entrance to the Temple from the Inner Ring Road
The temple was built in the late 19th century by an ardent devotee of Murugan, Annaswami Nayakar. He was a staunch devotee of Murugan and had built a small, thatched hut in which he placed a painted portrait of Murugan and started worshipping him. Although he suffered from an acute stomach- ailment, he went on a pilgrimage visiting all Murugan temples, braving bad weather, and thieves. One day, a Sadhu (sage) appeared in his dream and said Murugan was right in his home for worship. Annaswami Nayakar started offering poojas to Murugan, and on the word of a Palani Sadhu, he offered his tongue at the Thiruttani shrine of Murugan. His ailments disappeared.
One day he fulfilled his dream of visiting the southern Palani temple, and after Darshan (sacred view) of God, he was coming down the steps, when a beautiful picture of Murugan attracted his attention. He didn't have money to buy the picture. Next day, The shop keeper brought the picture to annaswami telling murugan came in his dream and asked to offer the painting. Annaswami bought this precious possession to his home in Chennai and asked the family to shift home elsewhere. Meanwhile, he experienced a divine power within him that started speaking truths (Arul Vaakku) and resolving problems of other devotees during pooja. His successor Rathinasamy Chettiyar agreed to Nayakar's wish to build a temple on the site.
Annaswami Nayakar oversaw the construction of the temple, while Rathinasamy Chettiyar arranged for making the sacred idol of Palaniandavar. They initiated the building of the temple in 1865. One day, Annaswami Nayakar attained spiritual abode and later came in the dream of Rathinasamy Chettiyar, asking him to take over his position. The disciple continued the tradition of resolving problems of devotees in a frenzied trance. The temple construction was completed. The sacred idol of Palaniandavar was installed, and the Kumbabishekam was performed. Offerings of devotees were used for poojas and the temple proceedings.
Rathinasamy Chettiyar asked devotees to call the temple Vadapalani Temple. He later attained spiritual abode, and the good work was continued by Bagyalingam, an ardent follower of Murugan. He continued the Arul Vaakku and the poojas.
Architecture of Vadapalani Murugan Temple[edit]
The temple is built on the traditional lines of south Indian temples. The Rajagopuram at the entrance has several stuccos with the legends of the Skanda Purana depicted on them. The Moolavar (main deity) resembles the Palani temple idol and is in standing position.
The temple courtyard houses several Sannidhis including that of Varasiddhi Vinayaka, Chokkanathar, Meenakshi Amman, Kali, Bhairava, Shanmuga with Valli and Deivanai. In the inner Praharam one can see the niches of Dakshinamurthy, Chandikeshwar, and Mahalakshmi, among others. There is a separate shrine for Angaaran (Mars), whose ruling deity is Murugan.
There is an eastern tower depicted with 108 Bharatnatyam dance gestures. The tower stands 40.8 meters tall. The temple has a spacious hall where marriages are conducted, and religious discourses take place.
There is a golden chariot built for Murugan. The temple tank is in front of the temple. The Thala Vriksham is a fig tree around which devotees tie small swings for progeny.
Significance of Vadapalani Murugan Temple[edit]
The belief is very strong here that people who cannot undertake the pilgrimage to the Palani temple can visit the Vadapalani temple with their offerings. Palaniandavar showers devotees with his blessings just the same as in Southern Palani. His grace resolves all issues for devotees, and they believe in the power of this sacred temple.
Only in this temple, one can see Murugan wearing footwear, a symbol that denotes shedding of arrogance. He is seen in a standing pose with his left foot forward to indicate he is in a rush to help his devotees.
Devotees offer silver and gold as offerings. Some spear their tongues, tonsure their heads, pierce their ears, and offer sarees. They take the Paalkavadi and Pushpakavadi as a special prayer. The temple is famous for helping devotees find answers to their problems in life. The temple witnesses around 7,000 marriages annually as it is considered an auspicious place for marriage.
Miscellaneous[edit]
The temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu.[3][failed verification]

Birla Mandir, New Delhi
Birla Mandir, Kolkata
Sun Temple, Gwalior, inspired by the Konark Sun Temple
Birla Mandir in Hyderabad
Birla Temple at Arera Hills, Bhopal
Shri Vishwanath Mandir also known as Birla Mandir in the Banaras Hindu University campus, Varanasi
The Birla Mandirs (Birla Temples) refer to different Hindu temples or Mandirs built by the Birla family in different cities across India. All these temples are magnificently built, some in white marble or sandstone. The temples are generally located in a prominent location, carefully designed to accommodate a large number of visitors. The worship and discourses are well organized. The first one was built in 1939 in Delhi collectively by Jugal Kishore Birla and his brothers and their father. Later temples were built by and managed by different branches of the family. For both of the temples in Varanasi, the Birlas joined other donors to support the cost.
History and design[edit]
The Birla temples in Delhi and Bhopal were constructed to fulfill a cultural void in these cities. As these cities were ruled for centuries by Muslim dynasties, these cities did not have any notable temples since the Islamic ruler did not permit the construction of grand Hindu temples with shikharas. Delhi, even though it was the capital of India, did not have any outstanding Hindu temples left. During the Mughal period, temples with a shikhara were prohibited until the late Mughal period. The first temple to be built by the Birla family is the Laxminarayan Temple in Delhi, which was opened in 1939. Located at a prominent site,[1] The temple was designed to be lofty and spacious, suitable for congregational worship or discourses. Although built using modern technology, it very loosely conformed to the Nagara style. The Birlas also built the adjoining Buddhist temple and donated it to the Mahabodhi Society.[citation needed]
The Birla temples in Delhi, Banaras and Bhopal use modern construction materials and techniques. Later temples are built of marble or sandstone and are constructed usually in the classical style of Māru-Gurjara architecture (from the Chandela or Chaulukya dynasty) of the 10-12th century, with some elements of local, regional styles, such as the gopuram of the Birla Mandir, Hyderabad, otherwise in the northern Māru-Gurjara style. The Saraswati temple, in the BITS Pilani campus, is one of the very few Sarasvati temples built in modern times (see Sharda Temple, Maihar). It is said to be a replica of the Kandariya Mahadeva Temple temple of Khajuraho; however, it is built of white marble and adorned with not only images of Gods but also of philosophers and scientists.[2] The Gwalior Sun temple is a replica (much reduced in size) of the famous Konark Sun Temple,[3] as it would have appeared before the collapse of the main tower. Anne Hardgrove states:
A national chain of the "Birla temples," temples of grandiose scale and design, have become major landmarks and part of the cityscapes of Indian urban life in the late twentieth century. The Birla temples exist in conjunction with other large industrial and philanthropic ventures of the wealthy Birla family, including major institutions of technology, medicine, and education. Birla temples have redefined religion to conform to modern ideals of philanthropy and humanitarianism, combining the worship of a deity with a public institution that contributes to civil society. The architectural forms of the two newest Birla temples (Jaipur and Kolkata) incorporate innovative, dual-purpose structures into the temple design that alter temple practices to reflect the concerns of modern public culture in a religious site.[4]
Birla Mandirs across India[edit]
Birla Temples in India
Image Temple Year Location Deity
Birla Mandir 1931-1966 BHU, Varanasi Shiva (Shri Vishwanath)
Laxminarayan Temple[5] 1939 Delhi Lakshmi Narayan
Buddhist Temple (Delhi Center) 1939 Delhi Dharmachakra Pravartana Buddha
Birla Mandir 1941 - 1961 Kanpur Lakshmi Narayan
Birla Mandir[6] 1955 Kurukshetra Krishna
Birla Mandir (Sharda Peeth)[7] 1956-1960 BITS Pilani Saraswati
Birla Mandir[8][9][10] 1957 Kurnool Laskhmi Narayan
Birla Mandir[11] 1960 Bhopal Lakshmi Narayan
Tulsi Birla Manas Mandir 1964 Varanasi Ram
Birla Mandir 1965 Shahad Vithoba
Renukeshaw Mahadev Temple 1972 Renukoot Shiva
Birla Mandir[12] 1966-1976 Hyderabad Venkateswara
Birla Mandir[13][14] 1976-1996 Kolkata Radha Krishna
Birla Mandir[15] 1984-1988 Gwalior Surya
Birla Mandir 1988 Jaipur Lakshmi Narayan
Birla Mandir Patna Lakshmi Narayan
Birla Mandir Akola Rama
Birla Mandir Nagda Vishnu
Birla Mandir[16] Alibaug Ganesha
Birla Mandir[17] Brajarajnagar Laxmi Narayanan
Birla Mandir Veraval Lakshmi Narayan
Birla Radha Krishna Mandir 2023 BITS Pilani Goa Radha Krishna

Look for Buddha Statue on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Buddha Statue in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Buddha Statue" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
For other uses, see Char Minar (disambiguation).
Charminar
Charminar
Religion
Affiliation Shia Islam
District Hyderabad district
Year consecrated 1591 (433 years ago)
Location
Location Old City of Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Municipality GHMC
State Telangana
Administration Government of Telangana
Geographic coordinates 17°21′42″N 78°28′29″E
Architecture
Architect(s) Mir Momin Astarabadi[1][2]
Style Indo-Islamic architecture
Founder Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah
Specifications
Height (max) 56 metres (184 ft)
Minaret(s) 4
Minaret height 48.7 metres (160 ft)
Materials granite, limestone, mortar and pulverized marble
The Charminar (lit. 'four minarets') is a monument located in Hyderabad, Telangana, India. Constructed in 1591, the landmark is a symbol of Hyderabad and officially incorporated in the emblem of Telangana.[3] The Charminar's long history includes the existence of a mosque on its top floor for more than 425 years. While both historically and religiously significant, it is also known for its popular and busy local markets surrounding the structure, and has become one of the most frequented tourist attractions in Hyderabad. Charminar is also a site of numerous festival celebrations, such as Eid-ul-adha and Eid al-Fitr,[4] as it is adjacent to the city's main mosque, the Makkah Masjid.
The Charminar is situated on the east bank of Musi River.[5] To the west lies the Laad Bazaar, and to the southwest lies the richly ornamented Makkah Masjid.[6] It is listed as an archaeological and architectural treasure on the official list of monuments prepared by the Archaeological Survey of India.[7] The English name is a translation and combination of the Urdu words chār and minar or meenar, translating to "Four Pillars"; the towers are ornate minarets attached and supported by four grand arches.[6]
History[edit]
The fifth ruler of the Qutb Shahi dynasty, Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, built the Charminar in 1591 after shifting his capital from Golconda to the newly formed city of Hyderabad.
Charminar, Char Kaman and Gulzar Houz, photographed by Lala Deen Dayal in the 1880s
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), the current caretaker of the structure, mentions in its records, "There are various theories regarding the purpose for which Charminar was constructed. However, it is widely accepted that Charminar was built at the centre of the city, to commemorate the eradication of plague", a deadly disease which was wide spread at that time.[8][9] According to Jean de Thévenot, a French traveller of the 17th century whose narration was complemented with the available Persian texts, the Charminar was constructed in the year 1591 CE, to commemorate the beginning of the second Islamic millennium year (1000 AH). The event was celebrated far and wide in the Islamic world, thus Qutb Shah founded the city of Hyderabad to celebrate the event and commemorate it with the construction of this building.[10][11]: 17–19
The construction began in 1589 and was completed in two years with a cost of Rs. 9 lakhs, which was around 2 lakh huns/gold coins in those times. It is said to weigh around 14000 tonnes with a minimum of 30 feet deep foundation. In 1670, a minaret had fallen down after being struck by lightning. It was then repaired at a cost of around Rs. 58000. In 1820, some part of it was renovated by Sikandar Jah at a cost of Rs. 2 lakh.
The Charminar was constructed at the intersection of the historical trade route that connects the city to international markets through the port city of Machilipatnam.[12]: 195  The Old City of Hyderabad was designed with Charminar as its centrepiece.[13] The city was spread around the Charminar in four different quadrants and chambers, segregated according to the established settlements. Towards the north of Charminar is the Char Kaman, or four gateways, constructed in the cardinal direction.[10][12][14][15]: 170  Additional eminent architects from Persia were also invited to develop the city plan. The structure itself was intended to serve as a mosque and madrasa. It is of Indo-Islamic architecture style, incorporating Persian architectural elements. A sample of Charminar is said to have been created at Dabirpura/Nagaboli graveyard before the actual construction.
Historian Masud Hussain Khan says that the construction of Charminar was completed in the year 1592, and that it is the city of Hyderabad which was actually founded in the year 1591.[16]: 4  According to the book "Days of the Beloved", Qutb shah constructed the Charminar in the year 1589, on the very spot where he first glimpsed his future queen Bhagmati, and after her conversion to Islam, Qutb Shah renamed the city as "Hyderabad". Though the story was rejected by the historians and scholars, it became popular folklore among the locals.[17]: 3, 12
Qutb Shah was also among the early poets of Dakhani Urdu. While laying the foundation of Charminar, he performed the prayers in Dakhini couplets, which are recorded as follows:[16]: 4 [18]
Dakhini Urdu
میرا شہر لوگوں سے مامور کر
راكهيو جوتو دريا میں مچھلی جيسے
Translation into Telugu
నదిలో చేపలని ఎలా నింపావో
ఈ నగరాన్ని కూడా అలా నింపు దేవుడా[16]: 4 [18]
Translation into English
Fill this city of mine with people as,
You filled the river with fishes O Lord.[16]: 4 [18]
Hunterian Transliteration
Mere shahr logon se mamoor kar,
Rakhiyo joto darya mein machhli jaise.[16]: 4 [18]
Translation into Hindi
मेरा शहर लोगों के मामूर कर,
राख्यों जो तो दरया में मछली जैसी
Mughal rule[edit]
Charminar was later captured and became an icon of Mughal Empire, the Asaf Jah I was the custodian of the famous structure.
80,000 Sepoy units loyal to the Mughal Empire lived within the "garrison of the Charminar" and often viewed it as a sister of the Taj Mahal.
Hyderabad State[edit]
Charminar was ruled by the princely state known as the Nizam of Hyderabad.
Structure[edit]
A minaret of the Charminar
Details
Clock of the Charminar, installed by the 6th Nizam Mir Mahbub Ali Khan
Interior
Second Floor
Street view
At night
Two minarets
Charminar lit up in the colors of the Flag of India
Charminar - May 2023
The Charminar masjid is a square structure with each side being 20 metres (66 ft) long. Each of the four sides has one of four grand arches, each facing a fundamental point that opens directly onto the street in front of it. At each corner stands an exquisitely shaped 56 metres (184 ft) high minaret, with a double balcony. Each minaret is crowned by a bulbous dome with dainty, petal-like designs at the base. Unlike the minarets of Taj Mahal, Charminar's four fluted minarets are built into the main structure. There are 149 winding steps to reach the upper floor. The structure is also known for its profusion of stucco decorations and the arrangement of balustrades and balconies.[19]
The structure is made of granite, limestone, mortar, and pulverised marble, weighing approximately 14,000 tones apiece.[20] Initially the monument was so proportionately planned that when the fort first opened, one could see all four corners of the bustling city of Hyderabad through each of its four grand arches, as each arch faced one of the most active royal ancestral streets.
A mosque is located at the western end of the open roof. The remaining section of the roof served as a royal court during the Qutb Shahi times. The actual mosque occupies the top floor of the four-storey structure. A vault which appears from inside like a dome supports two galleries within the Charminar, one over another. Above those is a terrace that serves as a roof that is bordered with a stone balcony. The main gallery has 45 covered prayer spaces with a large open space in front to accommodate more people for Friday prayers.
The clock on the four cardinal directions was added in 1889. There is a vazu (water cistern) in the middle with a small fountain for ablution before offering prayer in the Charminar mosque.[21]
Surrounding area[edit]
Panorama of Charminar complex, showing the Charminar, Mecca Masjid and Nizamia Hospital
The area surrounding Charminar is also known by the same name. It falls under the Charminar constituency.
Makkah Masjid[edit]
Main article: Makkah Masjid, Hyderabad
The monument overlooks another grand mosque called the Makkah Masjid. Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah, the 5th ruler of the Qutb Shahi dynasty, commissioned bricks to be made from the soil brought from Mecca, the holiest site of Islam, and used them in the construction of the central arch of the mosque, hence its name.
Bazaars[edit]
Main article: Laad Bazaar
Laad bazaar street scene in the year 2000
A market named Laad Bazaar is around Charminar. It is known for its jewelry, especially bangles. The nearby Pathargatti boulevard is also an important business street known for its pearls. In its heyday, the Charminar market had some 14,000 shops. The Bazaars surrounding Charminar were described in the poem "In the Bazaars of Hyderabad" by Sarojini Naidu.
Char Kaman and Gulzar Houz[edit]
Main articles: Char Kaman and Gulzar Houz
Char Kaman seen from the top of the Charminar
Four arches to the north of Charminar are known as Char Kaman. These were built along with the Charminar in the 16th century. These are the Kali Kaman, Machli Kaman, Seher-e-Batil ki Kaman and Charminar Kaman. At the centre of these arches is a fountain called the Gulzar Houz. The Char Kaman are in dire need of restoration, and protection from encroachments.[22][23]
Influences[edit]
In 2007, Hyderabadi Muslims living in Pakistan constructed a small-scaled quasi replica of the Charminar at the main crossing of the Bahadurabad neighbourhood in Karachi.[24]
Lindt chocolatier Adelbert Boucher created a scaled model of the Charminar out of 50 kilograms of chocolate. The model, which required three days' labour, was on display at The Westin, Hyderabad, India on 25 and 26 September 2010.[25]
The Charminar Express is an express train named after the Charminar, which runs between Hyderabad and Chennai.
Other appearances of Charminar
A replica of the Charminar built in the Bahadurabad, Karachi, Pakistan
Silver one rupee coin from the princely state of Hyderabad, featuring the Charminar
Five Hyderabadi Rupee note issued during the reign of Asaf Jah VII
The Charminar also appears on coins and banknotes of the defunct Hyderabadi Rupee, the currency of the erstwhile Hyderabad State.
As an icon of the city of Hyderabad as well as the Telangana State, the structure also appears on the Emblem of Telangana, along with the Kakatiya Kala Thoranam.[26][27]
Charminar Pedestrianisation Project (CPP)[edit]
The Charminar Pedestrianisation Project is an initiative aimed at transforming the area around the iconic Charminar monument in Hyderabad, India into a pedestrian-friendly zone. The project was proposed by the government of Telangana in 2016 and is part of a larger effort to improve the city's urban infrastructure. The Charminar is a historic monument that attracts millions of visitors each year, but the surrounding area is congested with traffic and is not conducive to walking. The Pedestrianisation Project seeks to address this issue by creating a car-free zone around the monument and improving the overall pedestrian experience.
The project involves the construction of wider sidewalks, pedestrian crossings, and improved lighting, as well as the installation of street furniture and landscaping to create a more attractive and welcoming environment for visitors. The plan also includes the development of a dedicated parking area for visitors to the Charminar, which will be located outside the pedestrian zone.
The project has been met with some controversy, as it involves the relocation of several street vendors and businesses that currently operate in the area. However, proponents of the project argue that the benefits of creating a more pedestrian-friendly environment around the Charminar will outweigh any short-term disruptions.
Overall, the Charminar Pedestrianisation Project represents an important effort to improve the urban infrastructure of Hyderabad and create a more attractive and accessible environment for visitors to one of the city's most iconic landmarks.[28] Later during January 2017, the new Government of Telangana introduced a 14-member French Delegation to take over the project to assess the feasibility in developing the monument as an eco-friendly tourism and heritage destination.[29][30] The team has inspected surrounding areas such as the Gulzar house, Makkah Masjid, Lad Bazar, and Sardar Mahal.[31][32][29][30]
UNESCO World Heritage Site tentative list[edit]
Charminar on a cloudy day
Charminar, along with the Qutb Shahi Monuments of Hyderabad: the Golconda Fort, and the Qutb Shahi Tombs, were included in the "tentative list" of UNESCO World Heritage Site. The monument was submitted by the Permanent Delegation of India to UNESCO on September 10, 2010.[33][34]
Temple structure[edit]
A temple named Bhagyalakshmi Temple is located at the base of Charminar. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) which manages the Charminar has declared the temple structure as an unauthorised construction.[35] Hyderabad High Court has stopped any further expansion of the temple.[36] While the origin of the temple is currently disputed, the current structure that houses the idol was erected in the 1960s. In 2012, The Hindu newspaper published an old photograph showing that the temple structure never existed.[37][38] The Hindu also released a note asserting the authenticity of the photographs, and clearly stated that there was no temple structure in photos taken in 1957 and 1962. Additionally, it showed photos that provide evidence that the temple is a recent structure - a temple structure can be seen in photos taken in 1990 and 1994. Also, a temple is seen in a photograph taken in 1986 which is kept in the Aga Khan Visual Archive, MIT Libraries' collections, United States, but not in the earlier ones.[37]

This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (September 2010)
Chikur Balaji Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
Deity Lord Venkateswara
Location
Location Chilkur Village, Gandipet, Ranga Reddy District, Telangana
State Telangana
Country India
Geographic coordinates 17°21′30″N 78°17′55″E
Architecture
Completed 14th century
Website
chilkurbalaji.com
Gopuram at Chilkur Temple
Chilkur Balaji Temple, popularly known as "Visa Balaji Temple'', is an ancient Hindu temple of Lord Balaji on the banks of Osman Sagar in Rangareddy District in Telangana. It is one of the oldest temples in Hyderabad Dist earlier now in Rangareddy Dist. built during the time of Madanna and Akkanna, the uncles of Bhakta Ramadas.[1]
C.S. Rangarajan[2] is the current head priest of the Chilkur Balaji Devasthanam. This temple has no hundi and neither accepts any money from devotees.[3] VAK Books also known as the Voice of Temples with religious news is available here. This is one of the special Temples in India with no green channel or privileges for VIP's.[4] The only other such temples are the Jalaram temple in Virpur (Rajkot), Gujarat and "Ramanuj Kot", a temple in Jodhpur, Rajasthan.[1] This temple fought and won the right to stay out of government control.[3]
Circumambulations[edit]
During a visit the devotee goes through the usual rituals of prayer, including 11 circumambulations of the inner shrine, and makes a vow. Once the wish is fulfilled devotees then walk 108 times around the sanctum sanctorum. The majority of wishes by devotees are visa related, thus Chilkur Balaji is also referred to as 'Visa' Balaji.[5] The 11 circumambulations represent the secret of creation – 11 means "1 soul and 1 body" – uniting both with devotion and full determination to fulfill wish, dedicate on the lord; there is no second, everything is god. In the 108 circumambulations, 1 represents the Existence, Almighty, God (Paramathma, Balaji in the minds of the devotee), 0 represents Creation (Illusionary World, Jagath) and 8 represents the time Human Body takes to come to this universe-8 months (Jivatma).
Temple Timings[edit]
The temple typically opens at 4:00 am on most days and closes at 8:00 pm.
Darshan Timings[edit]
Darshan is available from 6:00 am to 1:00 pm and then from 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm.
108 circumambulations(Pradakshinas) Timings[edit]
108 circumambulations(Pradakshinas) are conducted daily from 6:00 am to 12:30 pm and from 4:00 pm to 6:30 pm.
[6]

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Chowmahalla Palace" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Chowmahalla Palace
Afzal Mahal, Chowmahalla Palace
Chowmahalla Palace
Location in Hyderabad, Telangana
General information
Type Royal Palace
Location Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Coordinates 17.358247°N 78.471701°E
Construction started 1750
Completed 1880s
Awards and prizes National Tourism Award (Best Maintained and Differently abled Friendly Monument), 2017
Original use Seat of the Nizam of Hyderabad
Restored 2005–2010
Restored by Princess Esra
Owner Azmet Jah
Chowmahalla Palace or Chowmahallat is the palace of the Nizams of Hyderabad State located in Hyderabad, Telangana, India.[1] It was the seat of power of the Asaf Jahi dynasty (1720-1948) and was the official residence of the Nizams of Hyderabad during their reign. Presently the palace is converted into a museum but the ownership still lies with the family.[2]
The palace is constructed at the location of an earlier palace of the Qutb Shahi Dynasty and Asaf Jahi Dynasty[2] close to the Charminar. Construction of the palace as it stands today was started by Nizam Ali Khan Asaf Jah II[3] in 1769. He ordered the building of four palaces from which the nomenclature of Chau Mahalla was acquired.[4] The word chār or chahār, and its variation chow, means "four" and the word mahal means "palace" in Urdu, Hindi and Persian.[5]
History[edit]
Panoramic view in two parts of the Chowmahalla Palace at Hyderabad, photographed by Deen Dayal in the 1880s; the Charminar and Mecca Masjid are seen in the background (far right)
Showing Southern Courtyard and Facade of Tehniyat Mahal
Drawing Room of Chowmahela Palace
While Salabat Jung initiated its construction in 1750, it was completed by the period of Afzal ad-Dawlah, Asaf Jah V between 1857 and 1869.[6][7]
The palace is unique for its style and elegance. Construction began in the late 18th century and over the decades a synthesis of many architectural styles and influences emerged. The palace consists of two courtyards as well as the grand Khilwat (the Darbar Hall), fountains and gardens.[8] The palace originally covered 45 acres (180,000 m2), but only 12 acres (49,000 m2) remain today.[9]
Southern Courtyard[edit]
Chowmahalla Palace interior with chandeliers
Watch Tower gate of Chowmahalla Palace
Ornate with intricate stucco work, this is one of the two windows that flank the facade of the durbar hall
This is the oldest part of the palace, consisting of four palaces Afzal Mahal, Mahtab Mahal, Tahniyat Mahal and Aftab Maha built symmetrically opposite to each other in Neoclassical style. The forecourt in-between the palaces is adorned with a pond and a beautiful garden.[2]
The neoclassical palaces have double heighted verandahs or facades lined with European style columns. The columns in the Aftab Mahal and Mehtab Mahal are of Iconic order whereas the Afzal Mahal and Tehniyat Mahal have Corinthian columns.[2]
Northern courtyard[edit]
This part has Bara Imam, a long corridor of rooms on the east side facing the central fountain and pool that once housed the administrative wing and Shishe-Alat, meaning mirror image.
It has Mughal domes and arches and many Persian elements such as the ornate stucco works that adorn the Khilwat Mubarak. These were a characteristic of buildings built in Hyderabad at the time.
Opposite the Bara Imam is a building that is its shishe or mirror image. The rooms were once used as guest rooms for officials accompanying visiting dignitaries.
Khilwat Mubarak[edit]
This is heart of Chowmahalla Palace. It is held in high esteem by the people of Hyderabad, as it was the seat of the Asaf Jahi dynasty. The grand pillared Durbar Hall has a pure marble platform on which the Takht-e-Nishan or the royal seat was laid. Here the Nizams held their durbar and other religious and symbolic ceremonies.[10] The 19 spectacular Chandeliers of Belgian crystal were recently reinstalled to recreate the lost splendour of this regal hall.
Clock Tower[edit]
The main gateway to the Chowmahalla Palace on the western hand has a clock tower also known as a Khilafat clock. The tower is three storeys high and consists of balconies and jharokha of Mughal style same as the style of half domes.[10] It has been ticking since 1750. An expert family of horologists winds the mechanical clock every week.[11]
Council Hall[edit]
This building housed a rare collection of manuscripts and priceless books. The Nizam often met important officials and dignitaries here. Today it is a venue for temporary exhibitions from the treasures of the Chowmahalla Palace Collection of the bygone era.[citation needed]
Roshan Bangla[edit]
The Sixth Nizam, Mir Mahbub Ali Khan, is believed to have lived here and the building was named after his mother Roshan Begum.
The present Nizam (Barkat Ali Khan Mukarram Jah) and his family decided to restore the Chowmahalla Palace and open it to the public in January 2005. It took over 5 years to document and restore the palaces of the first courtyard to its former glory. The palace also has a collection of vintage cars, including the Rolls-Royce, which was used by the Nizam Kings.[citation needed]
Museum[edit]
The displays in the museum depict the origin and evolution of Hyderabad, achievements and valuable contribution of the Nizams towards the development of the state, and the social lifestyle of the royal family.
The museum is divided into parts arranged around two quadrangle courtyards in North and South.[citation needed]
Conservation[edit]
Conservation works were initiated in Chowmahalla Palace from 2000, several conservation architects and experts were involved in more than a decade long journey.[12] The initiative was undertaken by Princess Esra Birgen. Before commencement of the works, the place had fallen into disuse for a prolonged period and had deteriorated over the time. The vision for the restoration project was to rescue the exemplary palatial complex and to establish a contemporary civic use as a museum showcasing the splendour and valour of Nizams.[13]
The restoration process was divided into three stages, first stage involved thorough mapping, a fabric survey, and the development of conservation plans for the buildings' restoration as well as alternative re-use scenarios that might help assess the practicality of these historic buildings. In the second stage, structures that were in danger of collapsing had to be stabilised, and other urgent repairs like waterproofing and propping had to be made to prevent further damage. The complex's physical restoration as well as the addition of amenities to encourage the reuse of these structures were part of the final phase.[14]
In order to preserve the integrity of these ancient structures, their conservation was carried out using traditional craftsmen and techniques, and several building components were saved from demolition.  Many architectural features, including granite arches, elaborate lime plaster work, and terracotta balusters, were restored carefully in their original design in addition to structural repairs and stabilisation.[14] Apart from bringing back the past glory of the palace complex and reviving traditional materials and craftsmanship, the project also created a cultural oasis in the heart of the city.[13]
The project was awarded with a UNESCO Asia Pacific Merit award for cultural heritage conservation on March 15, 2010.[13] UNESCO representative Takahiko Makino formally handed over the plaque and certificate to Princess Esra, former wife and GPA holder of Prince Mukarram Jah Bahadur.[15][16]

For other uses, see Golconda (disambiguation).
Golconda
Borabanda, India
Golconda
Coordinates 17°22′59″N 78°24′04″E
Type Fort
Site information
Owner Archaeological Survey of India
Controlled by Archaeological Survey of India
Open to
the public Yes
Site history
Built 11th century
Built by Kakatiya_dynasty ruler King Prataparudra in the 11th century
Sultan Quli Qutb-ul-Mulk (1518 fortification)
Garrison information
Occupants Bahmani Sultanate, Golconda Sultanate, Mughal Empire
Golconda is a fortified citadel and ruined city located in the western outskirts of Hyderabad, Telangana, India.[1][2] The fort was originally built by Kakatiya ruler Pratāparudra in the 11th century out of mud walls.[3] It was ceded to the Bahmani Kings from Musunuri Nayakas during the reign of the Bahmani Sultan Mohammed Shah I, during the first Bahmani-Vijayanagar War. Following the death of Sultan Mahmood Shah, the Sultanate disintegrated and Sultan Quli, who had been appointed as the Governor of Hyderabad by the Bahmani Kings, fortified city and made it the capital of the Golconda Sultanate. Because of the vicinity of diamond mines, especially Kollur Mine, Golconda flourished as a trade centre of large diamonds known as Golconda Diamonds. Golconda fort is currently abandoned and in ruins. The complex was put by UNESCO on its "tentative list" to become a World Heritage Site in 2014, with others in the region, under the name Monuments and Forts of the Deccan Sultanate (despite there being a number of different sultanates).[1]
History[edit]
Ruins of the fort
The origins of the Golconda fort can be traced back to the 11th century. It was originally a small mud fort built by Pratāparudra of the Kakatiya Empire.[3] The name Golconda is thought to originate from Telugu for "Cowherd's hill" (గొల్ల కొండ, romanized: Gullakōnḍa).[4][5] It is also thought that Kakatiya ruler Ganapatideva 1199–1262 built a stone hilltop outpost — later known as Golconda fort — to defend their western region.[6] The fort was later developed into a fortified citadel in 1518 by Sultan Quli of the Qutb Shahi Empire and the city was declared the capital of the Golconda Sultanate.[5]
The Bahmani kings took possession of the fort after it was made over to them by means of a sanad by the Rajah of Warangal.[3] Under the Bahmani Sultanate, Golconda slowly rose to prominence. Sultan Quli Qutb-ul-Mulk (r. 1487–1543), sent by the Bahmanids as a governor at Golconda, established the city as the seat of his governance around 1501. Bahmani rule gradually weakened during this period, and Sultan Quli (Quli Qutub Shah period) formally became independent in 1518, establishing the Qutb Shahi dynasty based in Golconda.[7][8][9] Over a period of 62 years, the mud fort was expanded by the first three Qutb Shahi sultans into the present structure: a massive fortification of granite extending around 5 km (3.1 mi) in circumference. It remained the capital of the Qutb Shahi dynasty until 1590 when the capital was shifted to Hyderabad. The Qutb Shahis expanded the fort, whose 7 km (4.3 mi) outer wall enclosed the city.
During the early seventeenth century a strong cotton-weaving industry existed in Golconda. Large quantities of cotton were produced for domestic and exports consumption. High quality plain or patterned cloth made of muslin and calico was produced. Plain cloth was available as white or brown colour, in bleached or dyed variety. Exports of this cloth was to Persia and European countries. Patterned cloth was made of prints which were made indigenously with indigo for blue, chay-root for red coloured prints and vegetable yellow. Patterned cloth exports were mainly to Java, Sumatra and other eastern countries.[10]
Golconda fort
The fort finally fell into ruin in 1687 after an eight-month-long siege led to its fall at the hands of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb, who ended the Qutb Shahi reign and took the last Golconda king, Abul Hassan Tana Shah, captive.[11][5]
Diamonds[edit]
The Golconda fort used to have a vault where the famous Koh-i-Noor and Hope diamonds were once stored along with other diamonds.[12]
Golconda is renowned for the diamonds found on the south-east at Kollur Mine near Kollur, Guntur district, Paritala and Atkur in Krishna district and cut in the city during the Kakatiya reign. At that time, India had the only known diamond mines in the world. Golconda was the market city of the diamond trade, and gems sold there came from a number of mines. The fortress-city within the walls was famous for diamond trade.[citation needed]
Its name has taken a generic meaning and has come to be associated with great wealth. Some gemologists use this classification to denote the extremely rare Type IIa diamond, a crystal that essentially lacks nitrogen impurities and is therefore colorless; Many Type IIa diamonds, as identified by the Gemological Institute of America (GIA), have come from the mines in and around the Golconda region.
Many famed diamonds are believed to have been excavated from the mines of Golconda, such as:
Daria-i-Noor
Hope Diamond
Koh-i-Noor
Wittelsbach-Graff Diamond
Daria-i-Noor
Noor-ul-Ain
Koh-i-Noor
Hope Diamond
Princie Diamond
Regent Diamond
Wittelsbach-Graff Diamond
By the 1880s, "Golconda" was being used generically by English speakers to refer to any particularly rich mine, and later to any source of great wealth.
During the Renaissance and the early modern eras, the name "Golconda" acquired a legendary aura and became synonymous for vast wealth. The mines brought riches to the Qutb Shahis of Hyderabad State, who ruled Golconda up to 1687, then to the Nizam of Hyderabad, who ruled after the independence from the Mughal Empire in 1724 until 1948, when the Indian integration of Hyderabad occurred. The siege of Golconda occurred in January 1687, when Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb led his forces to besiege the Qutb Shahi dynasty at Golconda fort (also known as the Diamond Capitol of its time) and was home to the Kollur Mine. The ruler of Golconda was the well entrenched Abul Hasan Qutb Shah.[13]
The Golconda's Architecture[edit]
Guide map of Golconda fort
Golconda fort is listed as an archaeological treasure on the official "List of Monuments" prepared by the Archaeological Survey of India under The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act.[14] Golconda consists of four distinct forts with a 10 km (6.2 mi) long outer wall with 87 semicircular bastions (some still mounted with cannons), eight gateways, and four drawbridges, with a number of royal apartments and halls, temples, mosques, magazines, stables, etc. inside. The lowest of these is the outermost enclosure entered by the "Fateh Darwaza" (Victory gate, so called after Aurangzeb’s triumphant army marched in through this gate) studded with giant iron spikes (to prevent elephants from battering them down) near the south-eastern corner. An acoustic effect can be experienced at Fateh Darwazaan, a hand clap at a certain point below the dome at the entrance reverberates and can be heard clearly at the 'Bala Hisar' pavilion, the highest point almost a kilometer away. This worked as a warning in case of an attack.
Bala Hissar Gate is the main entrance to the fort located on the eastern side. It has a pointed arch bordered by rows of scroll work. The spandrels have yalis and decorated roundels. The area above the door has peacocks with ornate tails flanking an ornamental arched niche. The granite block lintel below has sculpted yalis flanking a disc. The design of peacocks and lions is typical of Hindu architecture and underlies this fort's Hindu origins.
Jagadamba temple, located next to Ibrahim mosque and the king's palace, is visited by lakhs of devotees during Bonalu festival every year.[15][16] Jagadamba temple is about 900 to 1,000 years old, dating back to early Kakatiya period.[17] A Mahankali temple is located in the vicinity, within Golconda fort.[18]
The fort also contains the tombs of the Qutub Shahi kings. These tombs have Islamic architecture and are located about 1 km (0.62 mi) north of the outer wall of Golconda. They are encircled by gardens and numerous carved stones.
The two individual pavilions on the outer side of Golconda are built on a point which is quite rocky. The "Kala Mandir" is also located in the fort. It can be seen from the king's durbar (king's court) which was on top of the Golconda fort.
The other buildings found inside the fort are: Habshi Kamans (Abyssian arches), Ashlah Khana, Taramati mosque, Ramadas Bandikhana, Camel stable, private chambers (kilwat), Mortuary bath, Nagina bagh, Ramasasa's kotha, Durbar hall, Ambar khana etc.
View of the ruins of the fort
Fort overlooking the city of Hyderabad
Mosque of Ibrahim
Baradari located at the top of the citadel
Jagadamba temple at the top of the Golconda fortifications
Mahankaali temple at Golconda, Hyderabad
Temple under rock formation in Golconda fort
View from the Baradari
Design inside the Golconda fort
Aerial view of Golconda fort
Cannon of the Golconda fort
Pathway in Golconda fort
Baradari fort
Golconda ruling dynasties[edit]
Kakatiya dynasty
Musunuri Nayakas
Bahmani Sultans
Qutb Shahi dynasty
Mughal Empire
Asaf Jahi dynasty
Naya Qila (New Fort)[edit]
Main article: Naya Qila
Naya Qila is an extension of Golconda fort which was turned into the Hyderabad Golf Club despite resistance from farmers who owned the land and various NGOs within the city. The ramparts of the new fort start after the residential area with many towers and the Hatiyan ka Jhad ("Elephant-sized tree")—an ancient baobab tree with an enormous girth. It also includes a war mosque. These sites are under restrictive access to the public because of the Golf Course.
Qutub Shahi tombs[edit]
Main article: Qutb Shahi tombs
Do-Minar, Golconda
The tombs of the Qutub Shahi sultans lie about one kilometre north of Golconda's outer wall. These structures are made of beautifully carved stonework, and surrounded by landscaped gardens. They are open to the public and receive many visitors. It is one of the famous sight-seeing places in Hyderabad.
Golconda Artillery Centre, Indian Army[edit]
195th Gunners' Day celebration at Golconda Artillery Centre, Hyderabad, 28 September 2021
Golconda Artillery Centre, Hyderabad, was raised on 15 August 1962 as the Second Recruit Training Centre for the Regiment of Artillery.[19][20] Golconda Artillery Centre is located in and around the Golconda fort. The Golconda centre has three training regiments and presently trains 2900 recruits at a time.[21]
UNESCO World Heritage[edit]
The Golconda fort and other Qutb Shahi dynasty Monuments of Hyderabad (the Charminar, and the Qutb Shahi Tombs) were submitted by the Permanent Delegation of India to UNESCO in 2010 for consideration as World Heritage Sites. They are currently included on India's "tentative list".[22][23]
Influences[edit]
In popular culture[edit]
Aline, reine de Golconde (1760), story by Stanislas de Boufflers
Aline, reine de Golconde (1766), opera by Pierre-Alexandre Monsigny
Aline, reine de Golconde (1803), opera by Henri-Montan Berton
Aline, reine de Golconde (1804), opera by François-Adrien Boieldieu
Alina, regina di Golconda (1828), opera by Gaetano Donizetti
Drottningen av Golconda (The Queen of Golconda, 1863), Swedish-language opera by Franz Berwald
Russell Conwell's book Acres of Diamonds tells a story of the discovery of the Golconda mines.
René Magritte's painting Golconda was named after the city.
John Keats' early poem "On receiving a curious Shell" opens with the lines: "Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem / pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?"[24]
Golconda is referenced in the classical Russian ballet, La Bayadère (1877).
Anthony Doerr's Pulitzer Prize–winning novel All the Light We Cannot See references the Golconda mines as the discovery place of the "Sea of Flames" diamond
In Patrick O'Brian's novel The Surgeon's Mate, a character describes a particularly valuable diamond as being worth "half Golconda".
The term 'Golconda' is used in White Wolf's Vampire: the Masquerade table-top role-playing game to refer to a mystical state of enlightenment. Pursuit of Golconda is usually the ultimate aim of a campaign, although what this might entail is largely left to the storyteller's discretion.
Places named after Golconda[edit]
A city in Illinois, United States is named after Golconda.
A city in Nevada, United States is named after Golconda.
A village located in the southern part of Trinidad had given the name in the 19th century to a rich tract of land which was once a sugar-cane estate. Currently, mostly descendants of East Indian indentured servants occupy the village of Golconda.
Gallery[edit]
Golconda Fort—Large View
Golconda Fort seen from a road
Stone Arch Ruins
Fort overlooking the city
Staircase leading to the top of the Fort
Ambar Khana
Rani Mahal
Taramati Mosque
Golconda fort inside view
Architecture inside Golconda fort
Golconda fort from inside
View of the Golconda fort
Golconda fort from outside

Hussain Sagar
Images from top to bottom:
Rare view of Jupiter, Venus and the moon forming a triangle at Hussain Sagar Buddha Statue during Blue Hour Footpath at Hussain Sagar road
Hussain Sagar
Location Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Coordinates 17.45°N 78.5°E
Type Artificial lake
Basin countries India
Max. length 3.2 km (2.0 mi)
Max. width 2.8 km (1.7 mi)
Surface area 4.4 km2 (2 sq mi)
Max. depth 32 ft (9.8 m)
Surface elevation 1,755 ft (535 m)
Islands Gibraltar rock (artificial)
Settlements Greater Hyderabad
Hussain Sagar (alternatively referred to as Tank Bund;[1] Telugu pronunciation: [ɦusen sɑːgər]) is a heart-shaped lake in Hyderabad, Telangana, built by Ibrahim Quli Qutb Shah in 1563. It is spread across an area of 5.7 square kilometres (2.2 sq mi) and is fed by the River Musi. A large monolithic statue of the Gautama Buddha, erected in 1992, stands on Gibraltar Rock in the middle of the lake. It also separates the city centre of Hyderabad from the neighbourhood of Secunderabad. The maximum depth of the lake is 32 feet (9.8 m).
History[edit]
A view of NSR bus on Tank Bund Road c. 1932
Hussain Sagar was built across a tributary of the Musi river in 1563 by Ibrahim Quli Qutb Shah. The lake was named after Hussain Shah Wali, who was the Master of Architecture in the Kingdom. It is an artificial lake that holds water perennially fed by canals from Musi river. Hussain Sagar was the main source of water supply to Hyderabad before Himayat Sagar and Osman Sagar were built on river Musi.
Hussain Sagar Map
The Buddha statue was chiseled out of a white granite rock, weighing 450 tons. It was carved by 200 sculptors for two years. The statue was transported to Hyderabad in November 1988. After initial problems, the statue was erected on 12 April 1992 on a red lotus pedestal.
Landmarks and attractions[edit]
Boating point in the lake
The road on the Tank Bund was widened in 1946 when Sir Mirza Ismail was the prime minister of Hyderabad Deccan. Further widening and beautification of the Tank bund took place during 1987-88 by the then Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh N.T.Rama Rao with the addition of fountains with dancing waters, tantalizing colored lights at night and bronze statues of renowned personalities.
Hussain Sagar Thermal Power Station[edit]
Hussain Sagar Thermal Power Station was built in 1920 by the 7th Nizam Mir Osman Ali Khan on the banks of Hussain Sagar lake. It was the first thermal power station of South India.[2] It supplied power to the twin cities of Hyderabad and Secunderabad from 1920 to 1983.[3]
Patton Tank[edit]
The Pakistan M47 Patton tank is a war trophy given to the 54th Infantry Division who had disabled it during the Battle of Basantar in Pakistan, during 15–17 December 1971. It was given to the city by the battalion after the India Pakistan war of 1971.[4]
Buddha statue[edit]
Main article: Buddha Statue of Hyderabad
An 18-meter high monolithic statue of Lord Buddha towers over the lake from atop the Rock of Gibraltar. The idea was a part of the Buddha Poornima project in 1985 by N. T. Rama Rao. The statue was chiseled out of a white granite rock, weighing 450 tons. It was carved by 200 sculptors for two years. The statue was transported to Hyderabad in November 1988. After initial problems, the statue was erected on 12 April 1992 on a red lotus pedestal.
Lumbini Park Jetty, Hyderabad
Birla Mandir in Hyderabad
Love Hyderabad Sculpture at People's Plaza on the banks of the picturesque Hussain Sagar lake
Sanjeevaiah Park
Prasads IMAX
NTR memorial
Saidaanimaa tomb
Lumbini Park[edit]
Main article: Lumbini Park
Lumbini Park is an urban park of 7.5 acres (3.0 ha) adjacent to Hussain Sagar. It was constructed at a cost of INR 2.35 crores on 5 acres (2.0 ha) of land as a part of the Buddha Poornima project. It has various attractions such as laser auditorium, boating facilities and musical fountains.[5]
Birla Mandir[edit]
Main article: Birla Mandir, Hyderabad
Birla Mandir refers to different Hindu temple built by the Birla family in different cities. All these temples are magnificently built with white marble on a 280 feet (85 m) high hillock called the Naubath Pahad located to the south of Hussain Sagar. The construction took ten years and was consecrated in 1976 by Swami Ranganathananda of Ramakrishna Mission.[6]
Sanjeevaiah Park[edit]
Main article: Sanjeevaiah Park
Sanjeevaiah Park is a public green space and park located to the north of the lake. Built on 92 acres (37 ha), the park is named after Damodaram Sanjivayya, former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh. The park is managed by the Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority and the park won the Best open landscape award during the 2010 Indian national trust for art and cultural heritage award presentations.[7]
Prasads Multiplex[edit]
Prasad's IMAX is a multiplex of an area of 235,000 sq ft (21,800 m2), housing an IMAX movie theater, a five screen multiplex, food court, multinational fast food outlets, a gaming zone and a shopping mall covering two levels of the complex.[8] It is India's third IMAX theater.[9][10] In November 2014, when Hollywood film Interstellar opened in theatres, Prasads was the only IMAX screen in India where the space drama was watched on 70mm film.[11][12] The movie screen is said to be the largest IMAX screen (64 ft in height x 101.6 ft in width) in India and it is said to be fixed in Screen 6 of Prasad’s multi-plex.[13] Screen 6 is now called PCX after renovation. Screen 6 was previously a 3D IMAX 70mm until 2014.
Snow World[edit]
Main article: Snow World
Snow World is an amusement park located beside Indira Park and along the Hussain Sagar lake. The park can accommodate a total of 2,400 visitors in a day. Said to be the first of its kind at any show theme park or snow dome in the world, the visitors are exposed to snowfall for ten minutes for every hour.
NTR Gardens[edit]
Main article: NTR Gardens
NTR Gardens is a small urban park of 55 acres (0.22 km2; 0.086 sq mi) adjacent to Hussain Sagar lake. Constructed in several phases since 1999, the park is presently being maintained by the Buddha Purnima Project Authority that functions under the directives of the Government of Telangana. The park is named after and houses the memorial of N T Rama Rao, a matinee idol and former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh who died on 18 January 1996.
Eat Street[edit]
Across the 10 km lakefront, spaces like Eat Street and Jalavihar Water Park are located.[14][15] People check out Eat Street which serves meals, fast food and other eating options.[16] An array of stalls serving everything from chaat and pizza to Mughlai and North Indian cuisine makes it a foodie's paradise.[17]
Tomb of Saidani Maa Sahebaa[edit]
Main article: Saidani Ma Tomb
Sayedani Maa Tomb is an Archaeological Survey of India declared heritage site located at the north end of Hussain Sagar. Saidani Maa Saheba was a saint of the Nizam era. An example of Islamic architecture, the tomb has been carved intricately with marble latticework.[18]
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Statue[edit]
India's 2nd tallest statue of BR Ambedkar in Hyderabad
Main article: B. R. Ambedkar statue, Hyderabad
in 2023, The giant 125-foot-tall statue of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar has been installed on 11.8 acres, adjoining the banks of historic Hussain Sagar lake and the new Telangana state secretariat.[19][20] The statue of Dr B R Ambedkar stands tall in his signature pose atop the country’s parliament house, which takes the overall height to 175 feet. It is the fourth tallest statue in India. The circular edifice resembling the parliament of India, also house a museum, library and an audio-visual hall across a 20,000 sq ft area to commemorate the life and times of Ambedkar. On 14 April 2023, Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrashekar Rao unveiled a 125-feet tall bronze statue of Dr B. R. Ambedkar at the Hussain Sagar lake on his 132nd birth anniversary.[21]
Telangana Amara Jyothi[edit]
Main article: Telangana Martyrs Memorial
Telangana Amara Jyothi
Telangana Amara Jyothi, also known as Telangana Martyrs Memorial is a major tourist attraction, located on the banks of Hussain Sagar.[22] It is the largest seamless stainless-steel memorial built in the world and is five times bigger than Cloud Gate (located in Chicago).[23] It was inaugurated by Chief Minister of Telanagana, K. Chandrashekar Rao on 22 June 2023.
Sailing[edit]
Hussain Sagar lake is a popular spot for sailing. Regattas have been held here since 1971 jointly by the EME Sailing Association and the Secunderabad Sailing Club. Hyderabad Sailing Week has been conducted here since 1984 when the first laser boats were introduced by the Laser Class Association of India. The event has grown from ten laser entries in 1984 to 110 laser entries in 2009. In August 2009 the lake was witness to the monsoon regatta in which sailors from all over India participated. Different classes of sailboats and yachts were raced including four J24, eighteen Hobie Cat and Forty-seven Optimist (dinghy).[24]
The Yacht Club of Hyderabad located at Sanjeevaiah Park started in 2009 and instituted the Monsoon Regatta the same year. The club started with just three boats now boast of more than 45 on its premises including Lasers, Optimists, Omegas, Kayaks, and many safety and rescue vessels. The club trains youngsters to compete at the national level.
Statues of Icons in Tank Bund, Hyderabad[edit]
Boating Ghat near Hussain Sagar
34 well-sculptured bronze statues, mounted on high platforms, of people who played iconic role in the development of Hyderabad and Telugu culture along the Tank Bund road. The following 34 personalities are commemorated in the order of appearance from Secunderabad.[25]
Komaram Bheem
Tribal leader from Telangana who openly fought against Nizam of Hyderabad with slogan Jal, jungal, zameen
Rudrama Devi
The 13th century Queen of the Kakatiya Dynasty which ruled over most parts of present-day Telangana and Andhra Pradesh
Mahbub Ali Khan, Asaf Jah VI
6th Nizam of the Asaf Jahi Dynasty
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
First Vice President of India and second President of India
CR Reddy
Educationist, political thinker, essayist, poet and literary critic
Gurajada Apparao
Telugu playwright, dramatist, poet, writer and humanist
Ballari Raghava
Telugu playwright, thespian and film actor
Alluri Sita Rama Raju
Indian Telugu revolutionary who fought against the British raj
Sir Arthur Cotton
British irrigation engineer instrumental in building the Prakasam Barrage, the Dowleswaram Barrage and the Kurnool Cuddappah Canal (K. C. Canal)
Tripuraneni Ramaswamy Chowdary
Telugu lawyer, poet, playwright, reformer, rationalist and humanist
Pingali Venkayya
Indian freedom fighter and the designer of the flag on which the Indian national flag was based
Kandukuri Veeresalingam
Social reformer and Telugu writer
Makhdoom Mohiuddin
Urdu poet, Marxist political activist and a forerunner of Telangana Rebellion against the Nizam of Hyderabad
Suravaram Pratapareddy
Social historian from Telangana
Gurram Jashuva
Telugu poet and Dalit activist
Mutnuri Krishna Rao
Indian freedom fighter, editor, scholar and literary critic
Sri Sri
Telugu poet and lyricist
Raghupathi Venkataratnam Naidu
Indian social reformer
Thyagaraja
Renowned composer of Carnatic music
Ramadasu
17th-century Indian devotee of Lord Rama and a composer of Carnatic music
Sri Krishnadevaraya
The Emperor of the Vijayanagara Empire who reigned from 1509 to 1529
Kshetrayya
Telugu poet and composer of Carnatic music
Potuluri Virabrahmendra Swami
Hindu saint, who lived in Andhra Pradesh
Bramha Naidu
Minister in a Medieval Andhra kingdom of Palnadu
Molla
Telugu poet who authored the Telugu-language Ramayana
Tana Shah
Last ruler of the Qutb Shahi dynasty
Siddhendra Yogi
Inventor of Modern form of Classical dance Kuchipudi
Yogi Vemana
Telugu poet and philosopher
Potana
Telugu poet best known for his translation of the Bhagavata Purana from Sanskrit to Telugu
Annamacharya
15th-century Hindu saint and the earliest known Indian musician to compose songs called sankirtanas in praise of the Lord Venkateswara, a form of Vishnu
Yerrapragada
Medieval Telugu poet
Tikkana
Second poet of the "Trinity of Poets (Kavi Trayam)" who translated Mahabharata into Telugu
Nannayya
Telugu poet and the first in Trinity of poets (Kavitrayam), who authored Andhra Mahabharatam, a Telugu retelling of the Mahabharata.
Gautamiputra Satakarni (Shalivahanudu)
Ruler of the Satavahana Empire in present-day Deccan region of India
Transport[edit]
Necklace Road MMTS Station
Hussain Sagar is near to Khairatabad, Lakdi-Ka-Pul and Assembly Hyderabad metro stations. Hussain Sagar is also serviced by MMTS Train stations at Necklace Road, James Street and Sanjeevaiah Park. Necklace Road runs along the lake and connects important locations on its banks.[citation needed]
Hussainsagar Lake Wetland Eco Region
The Hussain Sagar Jn was a two platform railway station earlier but was dismantled in the mid-1980s. It is now a Railway controlling cabin with three routes diverging towards Hyderabad, Secunderabad, and Begumpet.[citation needed]
Suicides[edit]
This section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (May 2021)
The lake has become a suicide spot, with 146+ deaths and 510+ suicide attempts between 2013 and 2016.[26] A lack of a proper rescue team, and a low fence barrier[27] has resulted in the high number of deaths.
International recognition[edit]
Heart of the world by UNWTO
Hussain Sagar, a heritage site of India was declared as the 'Heart of the World' by UNWTO on 27 September 2012, on the occasion of World Tourism Day, for being the World's Largest Heart-Shaped Mark, the World's Heritage Heart-Shaped Mark, and the World's Wonderful Heart-Shaped Mark on the face of the earth among the heart-shaped marks formed by the heart-shaped lakes and islands that exist in the world. Logo for the 'Heart of the World' was inaugurated by H.E. Mr. Taleb Rifai, Secretary-General, United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO), Madrid-Spain, in the year 2013.[28]
World's Largest Heart-Shaped Mark
Hussain Sagar lake is the largest heart-shaped mark among the marks formed by 78 heart-shaped lakes and 9 heart-shaped islands on the face of the earth.[28]
UNESCO world Heritage site tentative list
Hussain lake is one of the Qutub Shahi monuments of Hyderabad-Telangana, out of which Golconda Fort, Qutub Shahi Tombs, and Charminar were already placed in the tentative list of World Heritage Sites of UNESCO.[citation needed]
World's Wonderful Heart-Shaped Mark
This lake has many outstanding universal values of love around it in addition to its heart shape, the symbol of love, which explores the wonder of love in the world.[citation needed] King built the lake for his people's drinking & irrigation purpose out of his love towards his people.[citation needed] King Ibrahim named the lake after Hazrath Hussain Shawali (Sufi saint, medical practitioner and architect of the lake) as a sign of gratitude for Hussain's treatment that was given to the king during his sickness and made him recover from the sickness.[citation needed] Many historical monuments were placed on the bank.[citation needed]
Environmental conditions and conservation[edit]
This section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (May 2021)

This article is about the park in Hyderabad. It is not to be confused with Lumbini Gardens or Lumphini Park.
T. Anjaiah Lumbini Park
Lumbini Park
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Type Urban park
Location Hussain Sagar, Hyderabad
Coordinates 17.410°N 78.4722°E
Area 3.0 ha (7.5 acres)
Created 1994
Designer Raj Expedith Associates
Operated by Buddha Purnima Project Authority
Status Open all year
Lumbini Park, officially T. Anjaiah Lumbini Park,[1] is a small public, urban park of 3 hectares (7.5 acres) adjacent to Hussain Sagar in Hyderabad, India. Since it is located in the centre of the city and is in close proximity to other tourist attractions, such as Birla Mandir and Necklace Road, it attracts many visitors throughout the year. Boating is one of the best part and people go to the Buddha idol placed in the middle of the tank band in the boats. Constructed in 1994, the park is named after the former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh T. Anjaiah. The park is maintained by the Buddha Purnima Project Authority that functions under the directives of the Government of Telangana. In 2007, it was one of the targets of the 25 August 2007 Hyderabad bombings that killed 44 people.[2]
History[edit]
In 1994, Lumbini Park was constructed at a cost of ₹23.5 million (equivalent to ₹150 million or US$1.9 million in 2023) on 3 hectares (7.5 acres) of land adjacent to Hussain Sagar. In 2000, the Buddha Purnima Project Authority (BPPA) was established to maintain specially designated development areas in Hyderabad. Among tourist attractions such as Necklace Road and NTR Gardens, Lumbini Park is being maintained by BPPA.[3] To enhance the inflow of visitors, it constructed additional facilities for laser auditorium, boating facilities among other visually appealing features such as gardens and musical fountains.[3]
In 2006, the park was renamed after T. Anjaiah, the former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh.[4]
Buddha Statue of Hyderabad in Lumbini Park
2007 terrorist attacks[edit]
Main article: August 2007 Hyderabad bombings
On 25 August 2007, two bomb blasts in Hyderabad killed 44 people and injured 60.[2] One of the two blasts occurred during the evening hours in the laser auditorium that housed about 500 people at the time of the incident.[5] After a few days of being cordoned off for crime scene investigation, the park was reopened to public after the installation of metal detectors.[6]
Multimedia Fountain Show[edit]
Emotion Media Factory installed India's first spectacular water multimedia show in Lumbini Park. The multimedia fountain show plays daily to a large audience, the installation combines a full spectrum of media elements, from dazzling laser animation, live video, stunning sound quality, rhythmic musical fountains and extraordinary beam effects, all astonishingly portrayed on one of the largest water screens in India. The elements coalesce to re-create stories and historical and cultural aspects of Hyderabad’s past, present and future, enthralling thousands of guests each night.[citation needed]
Features[edit]
Water fall at Lumbini Park
Multimedia Show at Lumbini Park
One of the ride at Lumbini Park
A parcel of 1 hectare (2.5 acres) adjacent to the park was acquired from the Andhra Pradesh Tourism Department for constructing the laser auditorium. This auditorium, believed to be the first of its kind in India, can seat up to 2000 people at a time for a show on Hyderabad's history.[7][8] This was one of the initiatives for the park which was one of the key areas to support the World City strategy for Hyderabad.[9]
Working hours[edit]
The park is open to visitors on all days. A laser show is held at venue every day at 7:15 pm except weekends when it happens twice at 7:15 pm and at 8:30 pm. [10]
Getting there[edit]
Lumbini Park is near to Lakdi-ka-pul and Assembly Hyderabad metro station. Opposite Secretariat New Gate, Hyderabad, Telangana 500004

Website https://nzptsfd.telangana.gov.in/
Nehru Zoological Park (also known as Zoo Park) is a zoo located near Mir Alam Tank in Bahadurpura, Telangana, India. It is one of the most visited destinations in Hyderabad.[3]
History[edit]
Nehru Zoological Park's construction was started on 26 October 1959 and opened to the public on 6 October 1963. The Park is run by forest department, Government of Telangana, and is named after the first Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru.
Animals and exhibits[edit]
The zoo occupies 380 acres (150 ha) and is adjacent to the 600-acre (240 ha) Mir Alam Tank. Nearly 100 species of birds, animals and reptiles are housed at the zoo, including indigenous animals like the Indian rhino, Asiatic lion, Bengal tiger, panther, gaur, Indian elephant, slender loris, python, as well as deer, antelopes and birds. The 600-acre (240 ha) Mir Alam Tank with its unique multiple arched bund (embankment), attracts hundreds of migratory birds, providing yet another attraction for the zoo.[4]
The nocturnal house at the zoo artificially reverses night and day for the animals so that nocturnal animals are active while visitors are at the zoo. This exhibit includes fruit bats, slender loris, slow loris, civets, leopard cats, hedgehogs, barn owls, mottled wood owls, fishing owls, and great horned owls. There is also an aquarium, dino park, butterfly park and tortoise house. Since 2014, the zoo is running a adoption program; under which people and corporates can adopt an animal or entire enclosure, paying money for their upkeep.[5]
Attractions[edit]
The zoo runs multiple safari trips each day through the safari area where animals such as Asiatic lion, Bengal tiger, sloth bear etc. are housed. The zoo also has special educational shows and feeding sessions scheduled each day. Other attractions include a natural history museum and some trains.[6]
Conservation[edit]
Several animals are bred in the zoo have been rehabilitated in various deer parks and sanctuaries to restock the depleted natural population. In order boost captive breeding of vultures at the zoo the state forest dept has requested Maharashtra for 10 of these critically endangered birds.[7]
Gallery[edit]
Asian Tiger walks in water
Hyd Zoo - Two Tortoises
Hyd Zoo - Lion relaxing - Lioness Alert
Asian Tiger
Indian Gaur
Leopard
Sunbear at Nehru Zoological Park Hyderabad
Deer
White Tiger.

Ramoji Film City
Entrance to Ramoji Film City
Company type Privately held company
Industry Motion pictures
Founded 1996
Founder Ramoji Rao
Headquarters Abdullahpurmet, Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Key people Ramoji Rao
Parent Ramoji Group
Website ramojifilmcity.com
Ramoji Film City is an integrated film studio facility located in Abdullahpurmet, Hyderabad, India. Spread over 1,666 acres (674 ha),[1][2] it is the largest film studio complex in the world[3][4][5] and as such has been certified by the Guinness World Records.[6] It was established by Telugu media tycoon Ramoji Rao in 1996.[7][8][1] The Guardian described Ramoji Film City as "city within a city."[3]
Ramoji Film City Entrance
It is also a thematic holiday destination and a popular tourism and recreation centre, containing natural and artificial attractions including an amusement park. Around 1.5 million tourists visit the place every year.[9][5][7]
History[edit]
The film city is the brainchild of media tycoon and film producer Ramoji Rao, who wanted to build a studio similar to the ones in Hollywood.[1] On procuring the land, he signed art director Nitish Roy to design the complex. According to an executive, the builders kept the land, which at that time consisted of jungles and mountainous terrain, intact, without removing one tree or mountain. It was built in Hyderabad in 1996 in the outskirts of the city in Abdullahpurmet.[10] Maa Naannaku Pelli (1997) was the first film shot in the studio.[11]
Studio facilities[edit]
The studio has sets such as forests, gardens, hotels, a railway station, an airport, apartment blocks, mansions and workshops etc.[7] There is a central kitchen for the various film units shooting at any given point of time. The film city also has 6 hotels inside it, 47 sound stages and permanent sets ranging from railway stations to temples.[6] The film city has about 1,200 employees, and 8,000 agents.[7] The film city also handles about 400-500 films per annum in various Indian languages. On any given day, it has the capacity to facilitate 15 shoots.[7] Vintage buses and AC Coach are available to travel inside Ramoji Film City.
Tourism[edit]
People can visit the film sets, theme parks, amusement rides, etc.[1] The film city also has the set used for the films Baahubali: The Beginning (2015) and Baahubali 2: The Conclusion (2017); all the statues and props used in the films can be seen here. Around 1.5 million tourists visit the place every year.[9][5][7]
Gallery[edit]
Ramoji Film City
A railway Station set inside Ramoji Film City, which was used in the movie, Chennai Express
A statue of the character "Bhallaladeva" from the Baahubali films in Ramoji Film City
Burasura at Fundustan fun area at Ramoji Film City 3499
Photo from Eureka fun place at Ramoji Film city, Hyderabad
Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad - views from Ramoji Film City
Dilse restaurant at Ramoji Film Ciy hyderabad
Bahubali film set in Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad, India
Film sets in Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad, India
Railway station platform set in Ramoji Film City
Film sets in Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad, India
A view from Main Fun area of Ramoji Film City hyderabad
Mock of Rajastan Palace
Historical bhagavatam set in ramoji film city
The Vrindavan garden setting in Ramoji Film city Hyderabad
Ramoji Film City - Mughal Garden - Brindavan
Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad - views from Ramoji Film City
Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad - views from Ramoji Film City
Mughal gardens at Ramoji Film City
The creation of England in the picturesque city of Ramoji Film City
Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad, India
Ramoji Film City, Hyderabad - views from Ramoji Film City

Salar Jung Museum
Infobox
The Salar Jung Museum building
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Established 16 December 1951; 72 years ago
Location Dar-ul-Shifa, Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Type Art Museum
Key holdings Veiled Rebecca
Collection size 1.1 million objects
Owner Government of India
Website www.salarjungmuseum.in
The Salar Jung Museum is an art museum located at Dar-ul-Shifa, on the southern bank of the Musi River in the city of Hyderabad, Telangana, India. It is one of the notable National Museums of India.[1] Originally a private art collection of the Salar Jung family, it was endowed to the nation after the death of Salar Jung III. It was inaugurated on 16 December 1951.
It has a collection of sculptures, paintings, carvings, textiles, manuscripts, ceramics, metallic artefacts, carpets, clocks, and furniture from Japan, China, Burma, Nepal, India, Persia, Egypt, Europe, and North America. It is one of the largest museums in the world.[2]
History[edit]
A nobleman of the Salar Jung family of Hyderabad, Nawab Mir Yousuf Ali Khan, Salar Jung III (1889–1949) served as Prime Minister of Hyderabad during the Nizam's rule. He spent a substantial amount of his income, over a period of thirty-five years, collecting artefacts from all across the world.
Inauguration of the Salar Jung Museum by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, c. 1951.
After the Nawab died in 1949, the collections were left behind in his ancestral palace Diwan Devdi. The collection was formerly exhibited there as a private museum, named Salar Jung Museum, which was inaugurated by Jawaharlal Nehru on 16 December 1951.[3][4]
Old timers believe that the present collection constitutes only half of the original art wealth collected by the Nawab. His employees siphoned off part of it, since the Nawab depended upon his staff to keep a vigil.[citation needed]
The state decided to shift the museum to a new building and after a design competition, Mohammed Fayazuddin was selected as the architect of the new building.[5]
The foundation stone was laid by Jawaharlal Nehru in 1963, and in 1968, the museum shifted to its present location at Dar-ul-Shifa, and is administered by a board of trustees with the governor of Telangana as ex officio chairperson under the Salar Jung Museum Act of 1961. Some more art pieces were lost or stolen during the shifting of the museum from Dewan Devdi to the present site.[6]
In 2003, the museum signed a memorandum of understanding with the National Mission for Manuscripts, and was declared a manuscript conservation centre.
In 2006, a fire broke out in an auditorium in the museum premises. However, it was quickly extinguished and none of the artefacts were damaged.[7][8] After the incident, fire safety facilities were upgraded.[9]
Collections[edit]
Collection at the salar Jung Museum can be broadly classified into Indian Art, Middle Eastern Art, Far Eastern Art, European Art and Children's Section. Other than this a founder gallery is created which is dedicated to Salar Jung Family.
Indian Art[edit]
Indian Collection can be categorised into following galleries Indian Bronze, Indian Textile, Indian Sculpture, Minor arts of South India, Miniature Paintings, Ivory Carvings arms and armour, Metal Ware and Jade Carving.
Indian Miniature Painting[edit]
The history of miniature painting can be traced to 14th century. Before the invention of paper, the art was practised on cloth or certain kinds of leaves. The museum houses manuscripts on leaves from 15th- and 16th-century Gujrat. It holds a range of miniature paintings from Mughal, Rajasthani, Thanjavur, Malwa and Deccan schools.[10]
Stolen Interview by Raja Ravi Varma
Disappointing News by Raja Ravi Varma
Anantashayana Vishnu in granite, from the Chola period, 11th century CE
Lakshmi Narayan in granite, from the Vijayanagara period, 15th century CE
Indian collections of the museum
Notable works of miniature painting are:[10]
The Birth of the Prince, which captures the spirit of a significant event and depicts both Persian and Indian influence
From the Mughal school, showing European influence is Madonna with Child, from the 16th century
An important painting from the Mughal school of the 17th century is Prince with a Hawk. This is among the earliest of Mughal artistic works that depict facial features of Persians
A Mughal miniature painting which shows the style in full bloom is King with Nobles
The Deccan school with centres at Golconda, Bijapur, Bidar, Gulbarga and Ahmednagar, also produced some fine pieces of miniature painting which were strongly influenced by Mughal and Persian miniature-painting styles. Some noteworthy examples of both paintings and manuscripts in the museum: Bhog Bal, dated from 16th century, is one of the most prominent of the manuscripts; a painting showing Jamshed Quli and Ibrahim Quli in conversation is a good example of Golconda School; an interesting painting from Bijapur School is Elephants in a Fight. There are several paintings of Yoginis and from Ragamala.[10]
Modern Painting[edit]
Salar Jung III hand acquired few Modern Paintings but majority of the paintings in collection were collected by the museum in 1962. In India Ravi Verma was the pioneer of the Modern School, he worked with oil medium depicting Indian mythology and classic themes. The museum has two of his works, Stolen Interview and The Kerela Beauty. Other masters of the Modern School whose works are presented in the museum are Varma and Abdur Rahman Chughtai,[11] M. F. Husain,[12] K.K. Hebbar, Rabindranath Tagore, Abanidranath Tagore[13] Chugtai and Nandalal Bose[10]
Ivory Carving[edit]
Ivory Chair gifted to Tipu Sultan by Louis XVI from France
The Museum contains important examples of ivory carvings in different forms, such as furniture, mats, lamps, handles of daggers, chess and chausars. The chessman and chausar are interesting elements, the pawns being depicted as soldiers, while the king and queen are riding on elephants. These painted pieces belong to North India.[10]
The most notable element is the ivory carved chair gifted to Tipu Sultan by Louis XVI. The backrest of the chair is a fine lattice pattern and the armrest is carved as a lion head. Ivory lamp also deserves a special mention owing to its intricate craftsmanship and is the only ivory carving example from Mysore.[10]
The "Founder's Gallery" houses portraits of Salar Jung III, as well as other members of the Salar Jung family.
The Indian block includes jade-crafted daggers[14] of Jahangir, Nur Jahan and Shah Jahan; and weapons belonging to Aurangzeb, Tipu Sultan, Muhammad Shah, Bahadur Shah and Abul Hasan Qutb Shah.[15][16]
Indian sculptures from the Gandhara and Chola periods are also displayed.
Jade Collection[edit]
Main article: Jade collection of the Salar Jung Museum
Salarjung Museum's Jade Collection is one of the largest collection of jade displayed for public in India. The collection as per a publication from 1979 of Salar Jung Museum suggests that there were 984 objects with varying degree of craftsmanship. Most of the artefacts are from the Mughal Empire and some from the Asaf Jah Dynasty.
Intricate ivory carved lamp from Mysore
Western[edit]
In 1876, on a trip to France the unique "double sculpture", Mephistopheles and Margaretta was acquired by Salar Jung I. He also traveled to Rome, where he purchased a marble statue called Veiled Rebecca.[17] The Salar Jung family had a history of collecting art, and eventually the collections of Salar Jung I, II and III all ended up in the Salar Jung Museum.[18]
European art from British, French and Italian artists are displayed. Among works on show are some by the notable artists Canaletto, William-Adolphe Bouguereau and Francesco Hayez.[13][15] The furniture collection includes pieces from the time of King Louis XIV and Napoleon. Salar Jung III collected about 43,000 artefacts and 50,000 books and manuscripts out of which only few are displayed in today's museum.[19][20][21]
Eastern[edit]
The Eastern block houses Japanese artworks, porcelain pieces, samurai swords and sculptures from China, Japan, Tibet and Burma.[22]
Quran collections[edit]
The museum has a famous Quran collection, from around the world in different fonts and designs, called the Quran Written with Gold and Silver. There are many more collections of religious books, as well as Arabic Quran.[23]
Clocks[edit]
The Veiled Rebecca (1863), by Giovanni Maria Benzoni
A variety and array of clocks are in the clock room. There are ancient sundials in the form of obelisks to huge and modern clocks of the twentieth century. Others in the range vary from miniature clocks which need a magnifying glass to view closely, to stately grandfather clocks from place such as France, Germany, Italy, Switzerland and Britain, including the musical clock Salar Jung bought from Cook and Kelvey of England.
The variety of clocks includes the bird cage clocks, bracket clocks, grandfather clocks, skeleton clocks, etc. The museum also has examples of the clocks of the contemporary period of Louis XV, Louis XVI, and Napoleon 1st of France.
The Indian Parliament has declared the museum an Institution of National Importance.
Coins[edit]
There is a collection of about 600 coins the from VijayNagar dynasty to Bahmani empire, Moghul empire and Modern India. Few coins are 2300yrs old. Some Punch Mark coins from Kushan dynasty are also preserved. The coins are made of Silver, copper,lead and lead.[24]
Facilities[edit]
The museum building, semicircular in shape with 38 galleries, spread on two floors, displays only a part of the original collection. The ground floor has 20 galleries and the first floor has 18 galleries. The exhibits on different subjects are displayed in separate galleries. Each gallery is huge and has many artefacts on display including ones dating back to the 4th century. There are plans for a new Islamic Gallery, where Islamic artefacts and manuscripts of the Qur'an will be displayed.[25][26]
Apart from the galleries, there is a reference library, reading room, publication and education section, chemical conservation lab, sales counter, cafeteria etc.[13][27][28]
Gallery[edit]
Front view of Salar Jung Museum
Museum building against cloudy backdrop
A view of Salar Jung Museum along with Musi River
Eka-Mukhalinga, 4th or 5th century CE
Nandi, 12th century CE
Mayur Pankhi in ivory
Royal elephant in ivory
Arabic calligraphy (from the Quran)
Garuda in Anjali Mudra, 18th century CE
The Veiled Rebecca: melody in marble, 1863
Mephistopheles and Margaretta, c. 1876
Knives and hammers
Porcelain collection

Look for Shilparamam Cultural Society on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Shilparamam Cultural Society in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Shilparamam Cultural Society" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Shri Jagannath Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Shri Jagannath Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Shri Jagannath Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Taj Falaknuma Palace on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Taj Falaknuma Palace in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Taj Falaknuma Palace" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Wonderla Amusement Park on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Wonderla Amusement Park in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Wonderla Amusement Park" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Albert Hall Museum
The museum building designed by Samuel Swinton Jacob in Indo-Saracenic architecture with Rajput influences
Location within Jaipur
Show map of Jaipur
Show map of Rajasthan
Show all
Established 1887; 137 years ago
Location Ram Niwas Garden, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
Coordinates 26.91179°N 75.81953°E
Architect Samuel Swinton Jacob
Owner Government of Rajasthan
The Albert Hall Museum in Jaipur is the oldest museum of the state and functions as the state museum of Rajasthan, India. The building is situated in Ram Niwas garden outside the city wall opposite New gate and is a fine example of Indo-Saracenic architecture. It is also called the Government Central Museum. It was considered one of the best 19th century museums for the variety of its collections. It was renovated in 2008 and reopened as one of the most advanced museums in India.
History[edit]
Plaque for Samuel Swinton Jacob at Albert Hall Museum
The building was designed by Samuel Swinton Jacob, assisted by Mir Tujumool Hoosein, and was opened as public museum in 1887. Maharaja Ram Singh initially wanted this building to be a town hall, but his successor, Madho Singh II, decided it should be a museum for the art of Jaipur and included as part of the new Ram Nivas Garden.
It is named after King Edward VII (Albert Edward), during whose visit to the city as the Prince of Wales its foundation stone was laid, on 6 February 1876.[1] The museums founders collected the best examples of many crafts and sometimes even got some pieces manufactured. Colonel Tomas H. Hendley was given the responsibility of curating the collection. Maharaja and Hendley were helped in realisation of their vision by a young engineer, Samuel swinton Jacob, who was heading the Public Works department. "Hendley's meticulously compiled ledger-entry of every collected item is the backbone of our inventory and an important source material to this day."[2]
Albert Hall Museum grew out of an industrial crafts collection that Hendley had pit together for the grand Jaipur Exhibition of 1883.[3] Thie precious collection was housed in the magnificent building called Albert Hall. Hendley introduced the appointment of guides and demonstrators to conduct informed tours, a pioneering inititaive that was adopted by museums worldwide.[4] Rajasthan was under princely rule and the practice of purdah (veil) for women was widespread in the region. In this context, it is worth noting that every Friday was reserved for women visitors.[4] For many such innovative museum practices, Albert Hall became famous and many of its features were highly appreciated even in the West but the major attraction of the museum remain its exahustive collection of induatrial art and other exquisite pieces. The collections owe much to the vision, inspiration, and efforts of Maharaja Sawai Ram Singh II and Mahraja Sawai Madho Singh II, and to Hendley and Jacob.
Collection[edit]
The Egyptian mummy of Albert Hall Museum
The museum has a rich collection of artifacts including paintings, jewelry, carpets, ivory, stone, metal sculptures, and works in crystal.[5] The collection includes coins from the Gupta, Kushan, Delhi Sultanate, Mughal and British periods.[6]
The superb collection is a result of efforts of Hendley who wanted to preserve local skills and crafts and showcase the best craftsmanship of other places for the people of Jaipur. A repository of 19,000 objects was collected by Hendley, including arms and armour, sculpture, international art from Japan, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Hungary, Germany, Austria etc., pottery, carpets, jewellery, musical instruments, ivory, woodwork, and stone work. The Egyptian collection houses many objects. An Egyptian mummy is the main attraction of this museum. The 17th century Persian garden carpet and many ancient sculptures are coveted treasures of the museum. Numerous brass and metal objects were acquired for the collection. Many of them were replicas of the Jaipur Exhibits at Imperial Institute of London and others were purchased at the Punjab Exhibition of 1893–94 in Lahore.[7] The collection is divided into many galleries - pottery collection being the largest and most varied housing exquisite samples from many regions of India as well as both western and oriental world.
Further information: Pottery collection of the Albert Hall Museum
Building[edit]
The fountain in the museum's courtyard, of which the "carving of the rims" were "worth studying".[7]
The museum building is made of marble and stone. The building was expanded specifically with a museum in mind. The outer walls of the building are painted with scenes from ancient civilizations. The upper part of the courtyard has extracts from religious texts, such as the Quran, the Bible, and Indian epics, inscribed on the walls. Six scenes from Mahabharata and Ramayana depicted in colourful paintings are on the walls. The six-panel set includes the epic narratives of the great gambling scene, abduction of the white horse, Damayanti's Swayamvara, Sacrifice of King Mewardhwaja, and marriage of Bhikya to Chandrahas. These murals are copied from the 16th century manuscript of Razmnama, the Persian translation of Mahabharata by 19th century copyists. Albert Hall captured the imagination of experts, elites, the public and artists alike. Rudyard Kipling succinctly expressed a scholarly appreciation for the museum in Journal of Indian Art and Industry, dated 5 January 1885, "Every foot of it, from the domes of the roof to the cool green chunam (quicklime) daoes and the carving of the rims of the fountains in the courtyard, was worth studying."[7]
Gallery[edit]
Albert Hall Museum Night View
Albert Hall Museum Jaipur
Museum Exterior
Museum towers
Museum Exterior
Buddhist mural
Jain Tirthankar
Brahma statue
Artifacts of Albert Hall
Artifacts of Albert Hall
Lakshminarayan statue
Porcelain in Albert Hall
Albert hall museum
Ivorine Figures in Oak Frame, Thorvaldsens' The Age of Love, Albert Hall Museum
Medieval European Collection, Greaco-Roman Replicas, Albert Hall Museum
Persian Garden Carpet, Albert Hall Museum
Marble inlay work, pietra durs, on walls
Marriage Choice ceremony Mural
The Great Gambling Scene Mural, Albert hall Museum
Vaman Vishnu, Albert Hall Museum
Murals of Sawai Ram Singh II and Sawai Madho Singh II, Entrance of Albert Hall Museum, Jaipur]]

Look for Amer jeep Safari on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Amer jeep Safari in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Amer jeep Safari" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Anokhi Museum of Hand Printing
Facade of the museum building
Established 2005
Location Amber, Rajasthan, India
Coordinates 26.99267°N 75.85079°E
Website www.anokhimuseum.com
The Anokhi Museum of Hand Printing is a private museum located in Amber, Rajasthan dedicated to the art of hand-block printing. Opened in 2005, the museum is an initiative of the founders of Anokhi, an Indian retail brand of block-printed clothes.[1][2]
The museum was the conceived by Rachel Bracken-Singh, and her husband Pritam Singh.[3] It intends to preserve the traditional crafts, provide a tactile experience of learning about the technique of block-printing craft, and its rich history. The museum showcases a wide range of collections ranging from textiles, tools to equipment, etc.[2]
Background[edit]
The museum is situated in the Anokhi Haveli, a 16th-century mansion located near Amber Fort. The mansion previously known as the Chanwar Palkiwalon ki Haveli was bought in a dilapidated condition by Pritam Singh's father, John Singh, towards the end of 1970s. It was renovated over a period of three years from 1989 onwards. The building received UNESCO's Cultural Heritage Conservation Award in 2000 for its sustainable process of renovation. The restoration process took place under the guidance of architects Nimish Patel and Parul Zaveri of Abhikram. Whereas, the interior of the museum was designed by French architect Stephane Paumier.[2][3]
Rachel and Pritam decided to dedicate the space to showcase block printing. Storage facilities were improved to house the Anokhi Archives. After the revamp was completed, the opening exhibition on Print Progress - Innovation & Revival 1970-2005 was organised.[4] Today, the museum is spread over three floors of the mansion which showcases the history along with the complex processes and styles of hand-block printing. Rachel highlights,"Until the museum opened there was no simple way for people to observe a block printer or carver at work."[2][5]
Collections[edit]
The museum has a diverse range of collections which opens with the history of the craft. Further, it displays varieties of contemporary clothing materials ranging from rare traditional dresses to innovative designs created by the artisans. Anokhi Archives showcases a collection of clothing and home furnishings dating back to the 1970s.[6] Textile traditions exhibited here include the village outfits from Balota, Rajasthan, to the Ajrakh dying technique that is displayed in a glass case documenting the 14 steps followed in this printing-dyeing process from Gujarat.[2] Bakst: A Design Inspiration, designed for the museum's inauguration in 2005, illustrates the cross-cultural exchange between Indian artisans and Russian avant-garde designer Leon Bakst. Coats and jackets, bichaunis or bedcovers, and tools used in the craft like wooden and iron blocks, chisels, drills, etc., also form an important part of the collection.[6]

Look for Birla Mandir Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Birla Mandir Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Birla Mandir Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for City Palace of Jaipur on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for City Palace of Jaipur in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "City Palace of Jaipur" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Govind Devji Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Govind Devji Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Govind Devji Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Hawa Mahal - Palace of Wind on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Hawa Mahal - Palace of Wind in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Hawa Mahal - Palace of Wind" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
For the fort in Maharashtra, see Jaigad Fort.
Jaigarh Fort
Victory Fort
Part of Jaipur
Amer, Rajasthan, India
Jaigarh Fort
Jaigarh Fort
Victory Fort

Show map of Jaipur
Show map of Rajasthan
Show all
Coordinates 26.9859°N 75.8507°E
Type Fort
Site information
Controlled by Jaigarh Public Charitable Trust
Open to
the public Yes
Condition Good
Site history
Materials Red Sandstone
Battles/wars 436
Events Death of Dara Shikoh
Garrison information
Past
commanders Shazada Jalal Muhammad Mirza Mughal Empire
Jaigarh Fort is situated on the promontory called the Cheel ka Teela (Hill of Eagles) of the Aravalli range; it overlooks the Amer Fort and the Maota Lake, near Amer in Jaipur, Rajasthan, India.[1][2] The fort was built by Mirza Raja Jai Singh in 1726 to protect the Amer Fort and its palace complex and was named after him.[1][2][3]
The fort, rugged and similar in structural design to the Amer Fort, is also known as Victory Fort. It has a length of 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) along the north–south direction and a width of 1 kilometre (0.62 mi). The fort features a cannon named "Jaivana" (Jaivana Cannon), which was manufactured in the fort precincts and was then the world's largest cannon on wheels. Jaigarh Fort and Amer Fort are connected by subterranean passages and considered as one complex.
Geography[edit]
Left: Jaigarh Fort as seen from the Amer Fort. Right: View of Aravalli Hills from Jaigarh Fort
The Jaigarh Fort, located on one of the peaks of the Aravalli range of hills is built about 400 m above the Amer Fort.[1] It provides an excellent of view of Aravalli hills and the Amer Fort down below.
The fort is 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) away from Jaipur city. It stands on a short diversion from the Jaipur-Delhi Highway, which leads to the Jaivaan cannon at the Dungar Darwaza ('Darwaza' means "gate"), the same road leads to another important fort called the Nahargarh Fort. It can also be approached from the Amer Fort over a short climb along a steep hill track, arriving at the Awami Gate near the fort museum.[1][4]
History[edit]
Dara Shikoh secured the high impregnable Mughal Cannon outpost of Jaigarh Fort, in the year 1658 during the Mughal war of succession.
Amer was known in the ancient and medieval period as Dhundhar (meaning attributed to a sacrificial mount in the western frontiers). which was ruled by Meenas before 10th century AD. What is known in the present day as Jaigarh Fort, which was actually the main defensive structure rather than the palace itself. The two structures are interconnected by a series of encompassing fortifications and ruled by the Kachwahas from the 10th century onwards. The history of Amer and Jaigarh is indelibly linked to these rulers, as they founded their empire at Amer.[5]
Cannon foundry[edit]
During the reign of the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, Jaigarh Fort, which is located 150 miles south-west of Delhi, became one of the world's most efficient cannon foundries mainly due to the abundance of iron ore mines in the vicinity of the fort. The cannon foundry Jaigarh Fort had a massive wind tunnel that sucked air from the high mountains into its furnace creating temperatures as high as 2,400 °F (1,320 °C), the heated air would melt the metal. The molten metal would fill a reservoir chamber and pass into a cannon mold in the casting pit. Most of those cannons were massive, mostly 16 ft long and had to be prepared within a single day. The Rajput also built a large ingenious mechanical device that had a precision gear system driven by four pairs of oxen, the device was used for hollowing out the cannon barrels. When the Mughal war of succession broke out in 1658 Dara Shikoh secured the cannon outpost of Jaigarh Fort until he was defeated and executed by his younger brother Aurangzeb. Later however, the Mughal Emperor Muhammad Shah appointed Jai Singh II as the official Mughal quiladar of Jaigarh Fort according to a Firman, ultimately Jai Singh II is known to have molded the great Jaivana Cannon by utilizing the important foundry and devices inside Jaigarh Fort.[6]
Description[edit]
Jaigarh Fort water supply
The fort is highly fortified with thick walls of red sandstone and is spread over a layout plan with a length of 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) and a width of 1 kilometre (0.62 mi); it has an impressive square garden (50 metres (160 ft) square) within it. Ramparts in each corner are sloping and provide access to the upper level structures. The palaces have court rooms and halls with screened windows. A central watch tower on a raised ground provides excellent vistas of the surrounding landscape. The Aram Mandir and the garden within its courtyard, on the northern side of the fort complex, has a triple arched entrance "The Awani Darwaza" which was refurbished in recent times to get fine views of the Sagar Lake (an artificial lake); water from this lake used to be transported to the fort in pouches loaded on elephant backs and also by humans carrying water pots.[2][3][7] The triple arch gateway with fortification walls above it is painted red and yellow. It is oriented in an east–west direction and faces west. The architectural features are of Indo-Persian style with cyclopean walls built with dressed stone and plastered with lime mortar.[8] There are two temples within the fort precincts, one is the Ram Harihar temple of the 10th century and the other one is the Kal Bhairav temple of 12th century vintage.[3]
Charbagh garden at Jaigarh Fort
The water supply facilities in the fort was met by creating water harvesting structures in the vicinity in the Aravalli catchment and conveying water through a canal on the west side of the fort over a 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) distance (seen at site) to be stored in three underground tanks below the central courtyard. The largest tank had a capacity of 6 million gallons of water. There were completely false rumors, that a treasure belonging to the Kachwaha rulers of Amer had been stacked in the fort precincts (including the water tanks), that led to a totally unsuccessful search. The search had been ordered during the Emergency declared by the Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi during 1975–1977. A futile search was also launched, in 1977, of all the buildings in the fort, by the Income Tax department, using metal detectors.[2][7][4] [9] There was also a Parliament Question on this issue where a question was posed whether a "Search for treasure carried out from 10 June 1976 till November 1976 by the Income Tax Authorities at Jaigarh Fort on the Jaipur Delhi Road was closed to ordinary traffic for one or two days so as to make way for military trucks carrying treasures to the residence of the then Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi?".[10] However, the search carried out for treasures by an Army unit at Jaigarh Fort, after a three-month search had found no treasures. It was then conjectured that Sawai Jai Singh probably used the treasure to build the city of Jaipur.[11]
Armoury
The armoury chamber here has a wide display of swords, shields, guns, muskets and also a 50 kilograms (110 lb) cannonball. Pictures on display are old photographs of Jaipur's Maharajas namely, Sawai Bhawani Singh and Major General Man Singh II who served in the Indian Army as senior officers.[4]
Museum
The museum is located to the left of the Awami Gate; it has exhibits of photographs of the Royalty of Jaipur, stamps and many artefacts, which include a circular pack of cards. A spittoon of 15th century vintage and also hand drawn plan of the palaces are seen in the museum.[4]
Jaivana cannon[edit]
Main article: Jaivana Cannon
The Jaivana cannon
Jaigarh Fort was a centre of artillery production for the Rajputs. It is now home to the Jaivana – at the time of its manufacture in 1720, it was the world's largest cannon on wheels of the Early Modern Era.[1] The foundry where it was manufactured is also located here. A plaque at the entrance to the enclosure where the Jaivan Cannon is displayed gives relevant information on the history of the Cannon, its size and use. This cannon was never used in any battle as the Rajput rulers of Amer had friendly relations with the Mughals. This testifies to well-preserved features of fort.[3][7] The cannon was fired only once with a charge of 100 kilograms (220 lb) of gunpowder and when fired covered a distance of about 35 kilometres (22 mi).[4][9]
The Jaivana was manufactured during the reign of Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh II (1699–1743) at a foundry in Jaigarh. The barrel is 20.19 foot (6.15 m) in length and weighs 50 tonnes. It has a diameter of 11 inches (280 mm). The barrel has decorations carved on it which depict trees, an elephant scroll and a pair of birds (ducks). It is mounted on wheels and has the mechanism of two back wheels mounted on roller pin bearings, to turn it 360° and fire in any direction. A tin shed was built to protect the cannon against weather. The cannon had a range of 22 miles and used 50 kilograms (110 lb) balls.
Ticket[edit]
The entry fee for Indians is ₹150 per person and the entry fee for foreigners is around ₹200 per person. Student can show their Id cards and can have some discount.[12]
Timings[edit]
The gates of Jaigarh Fort open at 09:00 hours and close at 18:30 hours throughout the week. It is not advised to stay here in the evening as Jaigarh Fort is surrounded by thick deciduous forest. Nahargarh sanctuary[13] is a part of the forest, and therefore wild animals lurk in the dark.
In popular culture[edit]
Jaigarh Fort was the Pit Stop of the 6th leg on the American reality show The Amazing Race 14.
Gallery[edit]
A panoramic view from Jaigarh Fort

For the 1980 film, see Jal Mahal (film).
Jal Mahal
Jal Mahal
Show map of Jaipur
Show map of Rajasthan
Show all
Location Jaipur
Coordinates 26.9537°N 75.8463°E
Type Freshwater – Recreational
Catchment area 23.5 square kilometres (9.1 sq mi)
Basin countries India
Managing agency KGK Group of Companies JAIPUR
Surface area 300 acres (120 ha)
Max. depth 4.5 metres (15 ft)
Settlements Jaipur
Jal Mahal at night.
Jal Mahal (meaning "Water Palace") is a palace in the middle of the Man Sagar Lake in Jaipur city, the capital of the state of Rajasthan, India. The palace was originally constructed around 1699; the building and the lake around it were later renovated and enlarged in the early 18th century by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Amber.
The palace[edit]
Jal Mahal Palace after renovation
The Jal Mahal Palace is an architectural showcase of the Rajput style of architecture (common in Rajasthan) on a grand scale. The building has a picturesque view of Man Sagar Lake, but owing to its seclusion from land is equally the focus of a viewpoint from the Man Sagar Dam on the eastern side of the lake in front of the backdrop of the surrounding Nahargarh ("tiger-abode") hills. The palace, built with local sandstone, is a three-storied building, with the third floor only existing on the eastern side of the palace. The eastern side is not visible from the road side public promenade, which is the Western side of the palace. The additional lower levels of the eastern side remain underwater when the lake is full. The Jal Mahal has a terrace floor with a garden, and the garden has four Tibaris facing north, south, east and west. The Tibaris are designed in the Bengal roof style architecture while the four octagonal Chhatri on the roof mark the corners of the monument. The palace had suffered subsidence in the past and also partial seepage (plaster work and wall damage equivalent to rising damp) because of water logging, which have been repaired under a restoration project of the Government of Rajasthan.[1]
The hills surrounding the lake area, towards the north east of Jaipur, have quartzite rock formations (with a thin layer of soil cover), which is part of the Aravalli hills range. Rock exposures on the surface in some parts of the project area have also been used for constructing buildings. From the northeast, the Kanak Vrindavan valley, where a temple complex sits, the hills slope gently towards the lake edge. Within the lake area, the ground area is made up of a thick mantle of soil, blown sand, and alluvium. Forest denudation, particularly in the hilly areas, has caused soil erosion, compounded by wind and water action. As a result, silt built up in the lake incrementally raises the lake bed.[2] On the terrace of the palace, a garden was built with arched passages. At each corner of this palace semi-octagonal towers were built with an elegant cupola.[3]
The restoration works of the early 2000s were not satisfactory and an expert in the field of similar architectural restoration works of Rajasthan palaces examined the designs that could decipher the originally existing designs on the walls, after removing the recent plasterwork. Based on this finding, restoration works were re-done with traditional materials for plastering – the plaster consists of partly organic material: a mortar mix of lime, sand and surkhi mixed with jaggery, guggal and methi powder. It was also noticed that there was hardly any water seepage, except for a little dampness, on the floors below the water level. But the original garden, which existed on the terrace had been lost. Now, a new terrace is being created based on a similar roof garden of the Amer Palace.[4] The building is located near the shoreline of a lake with a maximum depth of 15 ft. As the four stories of the building are built under the water, this means it would be structured on the bottom of the lake.
The royal family chhatris and cenotaphs[edit]
At Gaitore opposite the lake are chhatris and cenotaphs erected over cremation platforms of some of the Kachwaha rulers of Jaipur. They were built by Jai Singh II within landscaped gardens.[5] The cenotaphs are in honor of Pratap Singh, Madho Singh II and Jai Singh II among others. Jai Singh II's cenotaph is made of marble and has impressive intricate carvings. It has a dome with 20 carved pillars.[1]
Restoration works[edit]
In 2004, the Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation signed an agreement with Jal Mahal Resorts, granting it a 99-year lease to develop 100 acres along the Man Sagar Lake (in the middle of which Jal Mahal stands) and the palace.[6] The 99-year lease was given out to Jal Mahal Resorts Pvt Ltd a SPV created uner the terms of the PPP project. From 2005 onwards the company has worked on the cleaning of the lake, reviving the ecology of the area and restoration of the palace. For the future, Jal Mahal Resorts Pvt Ltd plans to build a tourism destination around the Jal Mahal and make it a landmark tourist destination for all visitors to the city of Jaipur.
Joint sector project[edit]
Jal Mahal palace in 2011, after restoration.
The Lake restoration project of the Man Sagar Lake area with an estimated investment of ₹1.5 billion, equivalent to approximately $18 million (considered one of the largest and unique such projects in India) has evolved a plan that has diverse project components.[7] Consequently, there are many project stakeholders and beneficiaries. The project stake holders are: the Government of Rajasthan and their subordinate organizations such as the Public Works Department (PWD), Rajasthan Urban Development Authority (RUIDP), the Jaipur Development Authority (JDA – the nodal agency for implementation of all aspects of the project), the Department of Tourism, Rajasthan Project Development Fund (RPDF) and the Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation (RTDC) and an Empowered Committee on Infrastructure Development (ECID); the Central Government organizations associated for planning and financing are the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOE&F) through its National River Conservation Program (NRCP) and ILFS.[7]
The Private Sector Developer (PSD) appointed was M/s KGK Consortium. Under the public-private sector partnership model approved by the EICD, PDCOR had prepared the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the restoration of Man Sagar Lake, Jal Mahal restoration and lake precincts development. The total project area for restoration and development approved by ECID was 432 acres (175 ha) comprising the lake with 300 acres (120 ha) water spread, the lake precincts area of 100 acres (40 ha), which subsumed 15 acres (6.1 ha) of submerged land) for tourism development under joint sector cooperation and 32 acres (13 ha) for lake promenade and tertiary treatment facility and related works.[8]
The studies indicated two approaches to tackle the environmental degradation that had occurred in the lake, namely, dealing with natural catchment area and concurrently addressing the serious problem of municipal sewerage emerging from large scale urbanization or human settlement. Keeping this broad planning approach in view, under the lake restoration project, the works undertaken involved were: the re-alignment of city drains, de-silting of the lake, construction of artery road from Amber to Man Sagar Dam (about 2.7 kilometres (1.7 mi)), construction of check dam in a 100 metres (330 ft) length with silt removed from the lake, creation of three nesting islands for migratory birds, lakefront promenade in1 kilometre (0.62 mi)), afforestation and treatment of forest area portion of lake catchment, plantation to stabilise the slopes of bank formation. Afforestation envisaged plantation of local plant species such as Acacia arabica (desi babool) and Tamarix indica (planting close to the water edge where they can grow well), Terminalia arjuna (Arjun) poplar, neem and all species of Ficus, which would provide diversity in vegetation and also better habitat diversity for feeding by birds and wildlife.[2][9]
In addition, to remove eutrophication of the lake water and improve its water quality, in-situ Bioremediation process with 140 diffusers & 5 air compressors to aerate and create an inversion of the lake bed and stored water was also envisaged. The city sewage, which supplied 7.0 MLD of untreated sewage was treated with Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) and then led to the lake to maintain its water level, after due removal of nutrients through tertiary treatment. This process involved diversion of the Brahampuri Nala into the Nagtalai Nala by a lined channel to its south. This was then led through a treatment plant on site to generate secondary level effluent, which was then discharged into an artificial wetland through a hyacinth channel. For this purpose, a Physico Chemical Treatment Plant was also envisaged and the effluent from this plant was taken through artificially created wetlands in an area of 4 hectares (9.9 acres)) (not only to treat the water but also to serve as natural habitat for birds) and through this process the entire eco-system is being re-generated. Vegetation generated in this process is disposed of in a compost pit near the lake.[2]
It is also reported that about 500,000 cubic metres of silt was removed from the lake. This silt was then put to use for a strengthening of embankment and building of islands as wintering grounds for migratory birds.[10]
After the above initial restoration works of the lake and its feeder system were mostly completed by the JDA, during 2003, private sector developers were invited to develop identified tourism components on the land adjoining the lake. After following the due process, a joint sector undertaking called the PDCOR was formed between the JDA of the Rajasthan Government and the consortia of private developers with the lead provided by M/s. KGK Enterprises. The project for tourism development was entrusted to this joint group. The tourism project entailed the development of Convention Centre and Art Gallery, Multiplex and Entertainment Centre, Craft Bazaar, Arts and Craft Village, Resort Hotels, restaurants, and food courts, public park and gardens including responsibility for restoration and maintenance of the Jal Mahal.[7]
The interior of the Jal Mahal Palace is not open to visitors.

Look for Jantar Mantar - Jaipur on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Jantar Mantar - Jaipur in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Jantar Mantar - Jaipur" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Make Bike Trip on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Make Bike Trip in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Make Bike Trip" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article is about the temple. For the Sanskrit word, see Swayambhu.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Swayambhunath" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Swayambhu
Swayambhu Mahachaitya
स्वयम्भू स्तूप
Stupa at Swayambhu
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Religion
Affiliation Buddhism
Location
Location Swayambhu, Kathmandu
Country Nepal
Geographic coordinates 27°42′54″N 85°17′24″E
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Criteria Cultural: (iii)(iv)(vi)
Designated 1979 (3rd session)
Part of Kathmandu Valley
Reference no. 121bis-004
Swayambhunath (Devanagari: स्वयम्भू स्तूप; Nepal Bhasa: स्वयंभू; sometimes Swayambu or Swoyambhu) is an ancient religious complex atop a hill in the Kathmandu Valley, west of Kathmandu city. The Tibetan name for the site means 'Sublime Trees' (Wylie: Phags.pa Shing.kun), for the many varieties of trees found on the hill. However, Shingun may be of in Nepal Bhasa name for the complex, Swayambhu, meaning 'self-sprung'.[1] For the Buddhist Newars, in whose mythological history and origin myth as well as day-to-day religious practice Swayambhu occupies a central position, it is the most sacred among Buddhist pilgrimage sites. For Tibetans and followers of Tibetan Buddhism, it is second only to Boudha. Swayambhu is the Hindu name.
The complex consists of a stupa, a variety of shrines and temples, some dating back to the Licchavi period. A Tibetan monastery, museum and library are more recent additions. The stupa has Buddha's eyes and eyebrows painted on. Between them, the number one (in Nepal script) is painted in the fashion of a nose. There are also shops, restaurants and hostels. The site has two access points: a long staircase leading directly to the main platform of the temple, which is from the top of the hill to the east; and a car road around the hill from the south leading to the south-west entrance. The first sight on reaching the top of the stairway is the Vajra. Tsultrim Allione describes the experience:
We were breathless and sweating as we stumbled up the last steep steps and practically fell upon the biggest vajra (thunderbolt scepter) that I have ever seen. Behind this Vajra was the vast, round, white dome of the stupa, like a full solid skirt, at the top of which were two giant Buddha eyes wisely looking out over the peaceful valley which was just beginning to come alive.[2]
Much of Swayambhu's iconography comes from the Vajrayana tradition of Newar Buddhism. However, the complex is an important site for Buddhists of many schools, and is also revered by Hindus.
Mythology[edit]
According to Swayambhu Purana, the entire valley was once filled with an enormous lake, out of which grew a lotus. The valley came to be known as Swayambhu, meaning "Self-Created." The name comes from an eternal self-existent flame (svyaṃbhu) over which a sūpa was later built.[3]
There are holy monkeys living in the north-west parts of the temple. They are holy because Manjushri, the bodhisattva of wisdom and learning, was raising the hill which the stupa stands on. He was supposed to leave his hair short, but he made it grow long and head lice grew. It is said that the head lice transformed into these monkeys.
Manjusri had a vision of the Lotus at Swayambhu and traveled there to worship it. Seeing that the valley could be a good settlement, and to make the site more accessible to human pilgrims, he cut a gorge at Chovar. The water drained out of the lake, leaving the valley in which Kathmandu now lies. The Lotus was transformed into a hill and the flower became the stupa.
Part of a series on
Buddhism
Glossary Index Outline
show
History
show
DharmaConcepts
show
Buddhist texts
show
Practices
show
Nirvāṇa
show
Traditions
show
Buddhism by country
 Religion portal
vte
Swayambhunath in 1877
History[edit]
Swayambhu is among the oldest religious sites in Nepal. According to the Gopālarājavaṃśāvalī, it was founded by the great-grandfather of King Mānadeva (464–505 CE), King Vṛsadeva, about the beginning of the fifth century CE. This seems to be confirmed by a damaged stone inscription found at the site, which indicates that King Vrsadeva ordered work done in 640 CE.[3]
However, Emperor Ashoka is said to have visited the site in the third century BCE and built a temple on the hill which was later destroyed.
Although the site is considered Buddhist, the place is revered by both Buddhists and Hindus. Numerous Hindu monarch followers are known to have paid their homage to the temple, including Pratap Malla, the powerful king of Kathmandu, who is responsible for the construction of the eastern stairway in the seventeenth century.[4]
The stupa was completely renovated in May 2010, its first major renovation since 1921[5][6] and its 15th in the nearly 1,500 years since it was built. The Swayambhu Shrine was re-gilded using 20 kg of gold. The renovation was funded by the Tibetan Nyingma Meditation Center of California, and began in June 2008.[7]
At around 5 a.m. on 14 February 2011, Pratapur Temple in the Swayambhu Monument Zone suffered damage from a lightning strike during a sudden thunderstorm.[8]
The Swayambunath complex suffered damage in the April 2015 Nepal earthquake.[9]
Architecture[edit]
Torana on top of Swayambhunath stupa
Buddha shrines
White Tara shrine
The stupa consists of a dome at the base, on top of which is a cube structure, painted with eyes of Buddha looking in all four directions. There are pentagonal toranas present above each of the four sides of the cube with Buddha reliefs on them. Behind and above the toranas there are thirteen tiers. Above all the tiers there is a small space above which the Gajur is present.
There are five gilt Buddha shrines at the base of the stupa, all with a Buddha statue inside them. Equally five Tara shrines can be found here, but only four of them are gilt and actually house a Tara statue. The shrine of Vajradhatishori Tara, or White Tara, is empty.[10]
Swayambhunath stupa with Harati Devi's temple [11] and smaller stupas and pagodas in the foreground
Symbolism[edit]
The dome at the base represents the entire world. When a person awakes (represented by eyes of wisdom and compassion) from the bonds of the world, the person reaches the state of enlightenment. The thirteen pinnacles on the top symbolize that sentient beings have to go through the thirteen stages of spiritual realizations to reach enlightenment or Buddhahood.
There is a large pair of eyes on each of the four sides of the main stupa which represent Wisdom and Compassion, known as the Eyes of Buddha. Above each pair of eyes is another eye, the third eye. It is said that when Buddha preaches, cosmic rays emanate from the third eye which acts as messages to heavenly beings so that those interested can come down to earth to listen to the Buddha. The hellish beings and beings below the human realm cannot come to earth to listen to the Buddha's teaching, however, the cosmic rays relieve their suffering when Buddha preaches. Between the two eyes (also called Wisdom Eyes), a curly symbol, symbolizing the nose, is depicted which looks like a question mark, which is a Nepali sign of number figure one. This sign represents the unity of all things existing in the world as well as the only path to enlightenment through the teachings of Buddha.
There are carvings of the Panch Buddhas (five Buddhas) on each of the four sides of top of the stupa, just like there are statues of the Buddhas at the base of the stupa. Panch Buddhas are Buddha in a metaphorical sense in Tantrayana. They are Vairochana (occupies the center and is the master of the temple), Akshobhya (faces the east and represents the cosmic element of consciousness), Ratna Sambhava (faces the south and represents the cosmic element of sensation), Amitabha (He represents the cosmic element of Sanjna (name) and always faces the West) and Amoghsiddhi (He represents the cosmic element of confirmation and faces the north).
Each morning before dawn hundreds of Buddhist (Vajrayana) and Hindu pilgrims ascend the steps from the eastern side that lead up the hill, passing the gilded Vajra (Tibetan: Dorje) and two lions guarding the entrance, and begin a series of clockwise circumambulations of the stupa.
Swayambhu Purana[edit]
Main article: Swayambhu Purana
Swayambhu Purana (Devnagari: स्वयम्भू पूराण) is a Buddhist scripture about the origin and development of Kathmandu valley. Swayambhu Purana gives detail of all the Buddhas who came to Kathmandu. It also provides information about the first and the second Buddhas in Buddhism.
Gallery[edit]
Buddhist priest performing ritual with a tourist
Swayambhu site after 2015 earthquake
The hillock of Swayambhu
Swayambhunath Temple view from Kritipur Bhag Bhairav
Eastern staircase
Swayambhunath stupa area
Close-up of Swayambhunath stupa
Base of the stupa
Monk at Swayambhunath
Chaityas Courtyard
Ajima Temple
Shikhar style temple by Pratap Malla
Buddhist gompa
Temple Monkeys
Folklore items selling at Swayambhunath
Folklore items selling at Swayambhunath
Folklore items selling at Swayambhunath
Part of a series on
Tibetan Buddhism
show
Schools
show
Key personalities







show
Teachings
show
Practices and attainment
show
Major monasteries
show
Institutional roles
show
Festivals
show
Texts
show
Art
show
History and overview
vte

Look for Moti Dungari Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Moti Dungari Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Moti Dungari Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Nahargarh Fort
Roof Terrace of the Fort
Location Jaipur, Rajasthan
Coordinates 26.937255°N 75.815490°E
Built 1734
Location of Nahargarh Fort in Jaipur
Show map of Jaipur
Show map of Rajasthan
Show all
Nahargarh Fort stands on the edge of the Aravalli Hills, overlooking the city of Jaipur in the Indian state of Rajasthan. Along with Amer Fort and Jaigarh Fort, Nahargarh once formed a strong defence ring for the city. The fort was originally named Sudershangarh, but it became known as Nahargarh, which means 'abode of tigers'. The popular belief is that Nahar here stands for Nahar Singh Bhomia,[1] whose spirit haunted the place and obstructed construction of the fort.[2] Nahar's spirit was pacified by building a temple in his memory within the fort, which thus became known by his name.[3]
History[edit]
Jaipur city from Nahargarh Fort
Built mainly in 1734 by Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh, the king of Jaipur, the fort was constructed as a place of retreat on the summit of the ridge above the city. Walls extended over the surrounding hills, forming fortifications that connected this fort to Jaigarh, the fort above the old capital of Amber. Though the fort never came under attack during the course of its history, it did see some historical events, notably, the treaties with the Maratha forces who warred with Jaipur in the 18th century.[4] During the Indian Mutiny of 1857, the Europeans of the region, including the British Resident's wife, were moved to Nahargarh fort by the king of Jaipur, Sawai Ram Singh, for their protection.[5]
The fort was extended in 1868, during the reign of Sawai Ram Singh. In 1883-92, a range of palaces was built at Nahargarh by Dirgh Patel at a cost of nearly three and a half lakh rupees.[6] The Madhavendra Bhawan, built by Sawai Madho Singh had suites for the queens of Jaipur and at the head was a suite for the king himself. The rooms are linked by corridors and still have some delicate frescoes. Nahargarh was also a hunting residence of the Maharajas.[7]
Until April 1944, the Jaipur State government used for its official purposes solar time read from the Samrat Yantra in the Jantar Mantar Observatory, with a gun fired from Nahargarh Fort as the time signal.
Some scenes in the movies Rang De Basanti, Shuddh Desi Romance and Sonar Kella were shot at Nahargarh Fort.
Visitation[edit]
The ticket for the historical fort of Nahargarh costs ₹50 for Indian nationals.[8] For foreign tourists, the cost goes up to ₹200 (US$2.50). Students enjoy discounted prices. For foreign students, the ticket costs ₹50 (63¢ US), and ₹25 for Indian students.
Nahargarh fort is open from 10:00 and the gates of the fort closes in the evening at 17.30[9] The visitors are not advised to stay any later than that because the fort is surrounded by dense deciduous forest. The forest is part of Nahargarh Biological Park[10] and home to many wild animals.
Nearby attractions[edit]
Kanak Vrindavan
Jantar Mantar
Jaigarh Fort
Amer Fort
City Palace
Hawa Mahal
Jal Mahal
City of Jaipur seen from Nahargarh Fort
City of Jaipur seen from Nahargarh Fort
City of Jaipur seen from Nahargarh Fort
Stone Railing on Roof Terrace
Nahargarh Fort compound Jaipur, Rajasthan
Nahargarh Fort compound Jaipur, Rajasthan
Nahargarh Fort compound Jaipur, Rajasthan
Nahargarh Fort, Madhvendra Palace
Madhvendra Palace
A bastion at Nahargarh Fort, complete with cannon embrasures and gunports for small arms in the merlons

Look for Panna Meena ka Kund on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Panna Meena ka Kund in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Panna Meena ka Kund" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for College Street (Boi Para) on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for College Street (Boi Para) in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "College Street (Boi Para)" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Dakshineswar Kali Temple
দক্ষিণেশ্বর কালীবাড়ি
The Temple complex on the bank of river Hooghly, West Bengal.
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District North 24 Parganas
Deity Sri Jagadishvari Bhavatarini Kalimata Thakurani
Festivals Kali Puja, Durga Puja, Snana Yatra, Kalpataru Day
Location
Location Greater Kolkata
State West Bengal
Country India
Location in Kolkata
Geographic coordinates 22°39′18″N 88°21′28″E
Architecture
Type Bengal architecture
Style Navaratna
Founder Rani Rashmoni
Completed 31 May 1855; 168 years ago
Temple(s) 1 main temple of Kali
12 Shiva temples
1 temple of Radha–Krishna
Website
Official website
Part of a series on
Hinduism
Hindus History
show
Origins

show
Traditions
show
Deities
show
Concepts

show
Practices
show
Philosophical schools
show
Gurus, sants, philosophers
show
Texts
show
Society
show
Other topics

Glossary Outline
 Hinduism portal
vte
Dakshineswar Kali Temple or Dakshineswar Kalibari is a Hindu navaratna temple in Dakshineswar, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Situated on the eastern bank of the Hooghly River, the presiding deity of the temple is Bhavatarini (Kali), a form of Mahadevi or Parashakti Adya Kali, otherwise known as Adishakti Kalika.[1] The temple was built in 1855 by Rani Rashmoni, a Zamindar, philanthropist and a devotee of Kali Maa. The temple is known for its association with Ramakrishna and Ma Sarada Devi, mystics of 19th century Bengal.[2][3]
The main temple was inspired by Navaratna style Radhakanta temple in Tollygunge, built by Babu Ramnath Mondal of Bawali Raj family .[4][5][6][7] The temple compound, apart from the nine-spired main temple, contains a large courtyard surrounding the temple, with rooms along the boundary walls. There are twelve shrines dedicated to Shiva, Kali's consort, along the riverfront, a temple to Radha–Krishna, a bathing ghat on the river, a shrine dedicated to Rani Rashmoni. 'Nahabat', the chamber in the northwestern corner just beyond the last of the Shiva temples, is where Ramakrishna and Maa Sarada spent a considerable part of their lives.[2][8]
History[edit]
The Dakshineswar Kali Temple was founded around the middle of the 19th century by Rani Rashmoni.[9] Rani Rashmoni was a Mahishya by caste[10] and was well known for her philanthropic activities. In the year 1847, Rashmoni prepared to go upon a long pilgrimage to the sacred Hindu city of Kashi to express her devotions to the Divine Mother. Rani was to travel in twenty-four boats, carrying relatives, servants, and supplies.[8] According to traditional accounts, the night before the pilgrimage began, Rashmoni had a vision of the Divine Mother goddess Kali in a dream and reportedly said,[11]
There is no need to go to Banaras. Install my statue in a beautiful temple on the banks of the Ganges river and arrange for my worship there. Then I shall manifest myself in the image and accept worship at that place.
Profoundly affected by the dream, Rani immediately looked for and purchased a 12,000-hectare (30,000-acre) plot in the village of Dakshineswar. The large temple complex was built between 1847 and 1855. The 8.1-hectare (20-acre) plot was bought from an Englishman, Jake Hastie, and was then popularly known as Saheban Bagicha.[12] Partly old Muslim burial ground shaped like a tortoise, considered befitting for the worship of Shakti according to Tantra traditions, it took eight years and nine hundred thousand rupees to complete the construction. The idol of Goddess Kali was installed on the Snana Yatra day on 31 May 1855 amid festivities at the temple formerly known as Sri Sri Jagadishwari Kali, with Ramkumar Chhattopadhyay as the head priest. Soon his younger brother Gadai or Gadadhar (later known as Ramakrishna) moved in and so did his nephew Hriday to assist him.[1][2][3][8][13] On 31 May 1855 more than 1 lakh (one hundred thousand) Brahmins were invited from different parts of the country to grace the auspicious occasion. The next year, Ramkumar Chattopadhyay died, and the position was given to Ramakrishna. His wife, Sarada Devi, stayed in the south side of the Nahabat (music room) in a small room on the ground floor, which is now a shrine dedicated to her.[14] Ramakrishna was responsible for bringing much in the way of both fame and pilgrims to the temple.[15]
Rani Rashmoni lived for only five years and nine months after the inauguration of the temple. She fell seriously ill in 1861. Realizing that her death was near, she decided to hand over the property she had purchased in Dinajpur (now in Bangladesh) as a legacy for the maintenance of the temple to the temple trust. She accomplished her task on 18 February 1861 and died on the next day.[2] After her death, her sons-in-law took to celebrating Durga Puja in their respective premises.
Architecture[edit]
Built in the navaratna or nine spires style of Bengal architecture, the three-storeyed south-facing temple has nine spires distributed in the upper two storeys, and stands on a high platform with a flight of stairs, overall it measures 14 metres (46 ft) square and rises over 30 metres (100 ft) high.[3][8]
The garbha griha (sanctum sanctorum) houses an idol of goddess Kali, known as Bhavatarini, standing on the chest of a supine Shiva, and the two idols are placed on a thousand-petaled lotus throne made of silver.[3][8]
Close to the main temple are the row of twelve identical Shiva temples built facing the east in the typical aat-chala Bengal architecture, they are built on either side of the ghat on the Hooghly river. To the North east of the Temple Complex is the Vishnu Temple or the Radha Kanta Temple. A flight of steps lead to the columned verandah and into the temple where a silver throne rests with a 21
+
1⁄2-inch (550 mm) idol of Lord Krishna and a 16-inch (410 mm) idol of Radha.[3][8]
Gallery[edit]
The name of the idol of Kali worshiped in the temple is Bhavatarini.
Ramakrishna came to the temple in 1855, as an assistant to his elder brother, Ramkumar, the head priest, a job he took over the next year, after Ramkumar's death.
Photograph of Ramnath Temple from Views of Calcutta and Barrackpore, taken by Samuel Bourne.
Twelve Shiva temples at the Dakshineswar Kali Temple
Temple on the banks of Ganges
Main entrance (Lion gate/"Singha Dwar"; সিংহ দুয়ার) of the iconic Dakshineswar Temple.

Look for Eco Tourism Park on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Eco Tourism Park in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Eco Tourism Park" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Not to be confused with Eden Gardens State Park, Eden Garden, or Garden of Eden.
Eden Gardens
Cricket's answer to the Colosseum
Mecca of Indian Cricket
The Eden Gardens during Cricket World Cup 2023 Group stage match
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Address Gostho Paul Sarani, Maidan, B. B. D. Bagh
Kolkata, West Bengal
 India
Location Near Maidan, B.B.D. Bagh, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Public transit Eden Gardens
Eden Gardens
Esplanade
Seating type Stadium seating
Capacity 68,000 (Current)
100,000 (Planned Expansion)[1]
100,000 (1987-2010)
40,000 (before 1987)
Record attendance 110,564 ( India v.  Sri Lanka in 1996 Cricket World Cup Semi-Final)
Field size
66–68 meters (Square Boundaries)
76–78 meters (Straight Boundaries)
boundary length is 66 meters on the square side and 76 meters on the straight side
20.11 meters (Long Pitch)
Field shape Circular
Acreage 50 acres (0.20 km2)
Surface Grass
Construction
Renovated 2010–11[2]
Years active 1864–present
Ground information
Home club
Kolkata Knight Riders (2008–present)
Bengal cricket team (1889–present)
Bengal women's cricket team
Establishment 1864; 160 years ago
Owner Eastern Command of the Indian Army[3]
Operator Cricket Association of Bengal
Tenants India national cricket team (1934-present)
India women's national cricket team (1978-present)
Kolkata Knight Riders (2008–present)
Bengal cricket team (1889–present)
Bengal women's cricket team
India national football team (1982–1984)
End names
High Court End
Pavilion End
First Test 5–8 January 1934:
 India v  England
Last Test 22–24 November 2019:
 India v  Bangladesh
First ODI 18 February 1987:
 India v  Pakistan
Last ODI 16 November 2023:
 Australia v  South Africa
First T20I 29 October 2011:
 India v  England
Last T20I 20 February 2022:
 India v  West Indies
First WODI 1 January 1978:
 India v  England
Last WODI 9 December 2005:
 India v  England
Only WT20I 3 April 2016:
 Australia v  West Indies
As of 16 November 2023
Source: ESPNcricinfo
Eden Gardens is an international cricket stadium in Kolkata, India. Established in 1864, it is the oldest[4][5][6] and second-largest cricket stadium in India and third-largest in the world. The stadium currently has a capacity of 68,000.[7] It is owned and operated by Cricket Association of Bengal (CAB) and is the home ground of the Kolkata Knight Riders. It houses the headquarters of Cricket Association of Bengal.
Eden Gardens is often referred to as home of Indian cricket and has also been described as "cricket's answer to the Colosseum" [8] and called the "Mecca of Indian cricket", due to it being the first purpose-built ground for the sport.[9][10] Eden Gardens has hosted matches in major international competitions including the World Cup, World Twenty20 and Asia Cup. In 1987, Eden Gardens became the second stadium to host a World Cup final. The 2016 ICC World Twenty20 final was held at the stadium, with the West Indies beating England in a closely fought encounter. Eden Gardens witnessed a record crowd of 110,564 in the 1996 India Vs Sri Lanka Cricket World Cup Semi Final.
Stadium history[edit]
Ground of the Calcutta Cricket Club, 15 Jan'y. 1861 H.M. 68th L.I. from Rangoon, versus the Calcutta Cricket Club, a lithograph after a watercolour by Percy Carpenter, depicting a Calcutta Cricket Club match played at Eden Gardens.
The stadium was established in 1864. The origins of its name are uncertain. According to some, the stadium is named after the Eden Gardens park where it is located, itself named after the Eden sisters, Emily and Fanny, of Lord Auckland, the Governor-General of India (1836–1842).[11] Initially named the 'Auckland Circus Gardens',[12][13] the park was renamed to the 'Eden Gardens' in 1841.[14]
However, according to popular culture, Babu Rajchandra Das, the zamindar (landlord) of Janbazar, Kolkata and husband of Rani Rashmoni, gifted one of his biggest gardens, Mar Bagan, besides the river Hooghly, to Lord Auckland and his sister Emily Eden in gratitude for their help in saving his third daughter from a fatal disease. The garden was then renamed to the Eden Gardens.
The cricket grounds were built between Babughat and Fort William.[15] The stadium is in the B. B. D. Bagh area of the city, near the State Secretariat and across from the Calcutta High Court.
The first Test match at the venue was held in 1934 between England and India,[16] its first One Day International in 1987 between India and Pakistan[17] and its first T20 international in 2011 between India and England.[18] The 1993 Hero Cup semi-final featuring India and South Africa was the first day/night match.[19]
The stadium also hosted matches of the inaugural edition of Nehru Cup in 1982.[20]
India versus Uruguay match at Eden Gardens in Nehru Cup on 14 January 1984
The Eden Gardens also hosted the India versus Uruguay football match in 1984 Nehru Cup.[21]
1980 Stampede[edit]
16 people were killed in a stampede and riot inside Eden Gardens during a Mohun Bagan-East Bengal Calcutta Football League (CFL) match on 16 August 1980.[22]
Stadium[edit]
The stadium is the headquarters of the Cricket Association of Bengal. Apart from International matches, the stadium hosts the Bengal cricket team and the Kolkata Knight Riders, an Indian Premier League franchise. The stadium's Club House is named after former Chief Minister of West Bengal Dr. B. C. Roy.
1987 renovation[edit]
The stadium's capacity was expanded to 100,000 from 40,000 for the 1987 World Cup.[23] The expansion also included renovations to the press ure. 42 columns were added to provide the support for large roofs and multi-tiered covered stands. Even after the renovation, not all seats were covered and many sections lacked individual seats.
However, match day attendance of more than 100,000 spectators[24] has been recorded on at least 6 occasions until the early 2000s.
2011 renovation[edit]
Eden Gardens underwent renovation for the 2011 Cricket World Cup.[25] Renovation had been undertaken to meet the standards set by the International Cricket Council (ICC) for the 2011 World Cup. The Cricket Association of Bengal hired a consortium of Philadelphia-based Burt Hill Architects and Ahmedabad-based VMS architecture firms for a two-year project to renovate the stadium. The plans for the renovated stadium included a new clubhouse and players' facilities, upgrades of the exterior walls to give the stadium a new look, cladding the existing roof structure with a new metal skin, new/upgraded patron amenities & signage and general infrastructure improvements. The upgrade also meant reduction of the seating capacity to about 68,000 from around 94,000 before the upgrade.[26]
Due to unsafe conditions arising from the incomplete renovations, the ICC withdrew the India vs. England match from the Eden Gardens. This match, scheduled on 27 February 2011,[27] was played in Bengaluru at M.Chinnaswamy Stadium.
The stadium hosted the remaining three scheduled World Cup 2011 Matches on 15, 18 and 20 March 2011. In the last of these three matches (Kenya vs Zimbabwe), the stadium had the lowest ticket-purchasing crowd in its recorded history with 15 spectators having bought tickets.[28]
Stands[edit]
Eden Gardens stands have been named after prominent local cricketers and soldiers. On 22 January 2017, two stands were named after Indian cricketers - Sourav Ganguly and Pankaj Roy while two more were after cricket administrators - BN Dutt (BCCI President 1988 to 1990) and Jagmohan Dalmiya (BCCI President 2001–04, 2013 - interim, 2015).[29] Dalmiya served as ICC President from 1997 to 2000.
On 27 April 2017, 4 stands were named after Indian soldiers[30] - Colonel Neelakantan Jayachandran Nair, Havildar Hangpan Dada, Lieutenant Colonel Dhan Singh Thapa and Subedar Joginder Singh Sahnan. LC Thapa and Subedar Singh are Param Vir Chakra awardees - the highest wartime military decoration in India while Col Nair and Havildar Dada are Ashok Chakra - the highest peacetime military decoration.
Experience[edit]
Eden Gardens is renowned for its large and passionate crowds.[31][32] Former Aussie captain Steve Waugh considers the Eden Gardens as 'Lord's of the subcontinent'.[33] Dileep Vengsarkar called Eden Gardens as the second best after Lords.[32] Former Indian Captain and Kolkata-native Sourav Ganguly confessed once in an interview that the roar of crowd at the stadium he heard when India defeated Australia in the Second Test of 2000–01 Border–Gavaskar Trophy was the loudest he had ever heard.
In 2016, a bell was added to the stadium to ring in the start of day's play for test cricket and start of match for ODI & T20I matches. Kapil Dev was the first person to ring the bell to start the test match between India and New Zealand in September 2016.[34]
Eden Gardens front facade
Massive crowd during KKR Vs RCB 2017 IPL match.
The ground during a Test match
The ground before Cricket World Cup 2011 renovation.
Eden Gardens after renovations.
Night view of Eden Gardens
Eden Gardens during a 2023 IPL match
Cricket World Cup matches[edit]
The Bell at the Eden Gardens
Eden Gardens has hosted 15 Cricket World Cup matches hosted in India across formats and men's and women's cricket. Eden Gardens has hosted 11 Cricket World Cup matches in 1987 (2), 1996 (1), 2011 (3) and 2023 (5, including a semi-final). The stadium hosted 5 T20I matches during 2016 ICC World Twenty20. The stadium hosted 2 Women's Cricket World Cup matches - one each in 1978 and 1997 and one Women T20I match during the 2016 ICC Women's World Twenty20 tournament.
Eden Gardens has hosted 4 finals (1987 ODI CWC, 2016 T20I, 1997 Women's CWC and 2016 Women's T20I) and 2 semi-finals (1996 ODI CWC, 2023 ODI CWC).
1987 ICC Cricket World Cup[edit]
Main article: 1987 Cricket World Cup
23 October 1987
Scorecard
Zimbabwe 
227/4 (50 overs)
v
 New Zealand
229/6 (47.4 overs)
Kevin Arnott 51 (83)
Stephen Boock 2/43 (10 overs)
Jeff Crowe 88* (105)
Ali Shah 2/34 (10 overs)
 New Zealand won by 4 wickets
Player of the match: Jeff Crowe (NZ)
Finals[edit]
Main article: 1987 Cricket World Cup Final
8 November 1987
Scorecard
Australia 
253/5 (50 overs)
v
 England
246/8 (50 overs)
David Boon 75 (125)
Eddie Hemmings 2/48 (10 overs)
Bill Athey 58 (103)
Allan Border 2/38 (7 overs)
 Australia won by 7 runs
Player of the match: David Boon (Aus)
1996 ICC Cricket World Cup[edit]
Main article: 1996 Cricket World Cup
13 March 1996
Scorecard
Sri Lanka 
251/8 (50 overs)
v
 India
120/8 (34.1 overs)
 Sri Lanka won
The match was awarded to Sri Lanka by match referee Clive Lloyd when play could not continue due to the rioting crowd.
2011 ICC Cricket World Cup[edit]
Main article: 2011 Cricket World Cup
Eden Gardens was meant to host a Group B Match between India and England on 27 February 2011. The ICC, however, stripped the stadium of the match after deciding that the renovation of the grounds would not be completed in time.
15 March 2011
14:30 (D/N)
South Africa 
272/7 (50 overs)
v
 Ireland
141 (33.2 overs)
JP Duminy 99 (103)
John Mooney 1/36 (8 overs)
Gary Wilson 31 (48)
Robin Peterson 3/32 (8 overs)
 South Africa won by 131 runs
Umpires: Kumar Dharmasena (SL) and Billy Doctrove (WI)
Player of the match: JP Duminy (SA)
Ireland won the toss and elected to field.
18 March 2011
09:30
Netherlands 
306 (50 overs)
v
 Ireland
307/4 (47.4 overs)
Ryan ten Doeschate 106 (108)
Paul Stirling 2/51 (10 overs)
Paul Stirling 101 (72)
Tom Cooper 2/31 (7 overs)
 Ireland won by 6 wickets
Umpires: Billy Doctrove (WI) and Ian Gould (Eng)
Player of the match: Paul Stirling (Ire)
Ireland won the toss and elected to field.
20 March 2011
09:30
Zimbabwe 
308/6 (50 overs)
v
 Kenya
147 (36 overs)
Craig Ervine 66 (54)
Elijah Otieno 2/61 (10 overs)
Nehemiah Odhiambo 44* (47)
Ray Price 2/20 (7 overs)
 Zimbabwe won by 161 runs
Umpires: Asoka de Silva (SL) and Kumar Dharmasena (SL)
Player of the match: Craig Ervine (Zim)
Zimbabwe won the toss and elected to bat.
2023 ICC Cricket World Cup[edit]
Main article: 2023 Cricket World Cup
28 October 2023
14:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
Netherlands 
229 (50 overs)
v
 Bangladesh
142 (42.2 overs)
Scott Edwards 68 (89)
Mustafizur Rahman 2/36 (10 overs)
Mehidy Hasan 35 (40)
Paul van Meekeren 4/23 (7.2 overs)
Netherlands won by 87 runs
Umpires: Joel Wilson (WI) and Paul Wilson (Aus)
Player of the match: Paul van Meekeren (Ned)
Netherlands won the toss and elected to bat.
31 October 2023
14:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
Bangladesh 
204 (45.1 overs)
v
 Pakistan
205/3 (32.3 overs)
Mahmudullah 56 (70)
Shaheen Afridi 3/23 (9 overs)
Fakhar Zaman 81 (74)
Mehidy Hasan 3/60 (9 overs)
Pakistan won by 7 wickets
Umpires: Richard Kettleborough (Eng) and Nitin Menon (Ind)
Player of the match: Fakhar Zaman (Pak)
Bangladesh won the toss and elected to bat.
Shaheen Afridi (Pak) and Mehidy Hasan (Ban) both took their 100th wicket in ODIs.[35][36]
Bangladesh were eliminated as a result of this match.[37]
5 November 2023
14:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
India 
326/5 (50 overs)
v
 South Africa
83 (27.1 overs)
Virat Kohli 101* (121)
Keshav Maharaj 1/30 (10 overs)
Marco Jansen 14 (30)
Ravindra Jadeja 5/33 (9 overs)
India won by 243 runs
Umpires: Kumar Dharmasena (SL) and Paul Reiffel (Aus)
Player of the match: Virat Kohli (Ind)
India won the toss and elected to bat.
Virat Kohli (Ind) equalled Sachin Tendulkar's record for the most centuries in ODIs (49).[38]
India confirmed their top position in league table with this win.
South Africa's 83 was their lowest innings total in World Cups, lower than their 149 against Australia in 2007.[39]
South Africa's 243-run loss was their heaviest in ODIs, in terms of runs, surpassing their 182-run loss to Pakistan in 2002.[40]
11 November 2023
14:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
England 
337/9 (50 overs)
v
 Pakistan
244 (43.3 overs)
Ben Stokes 84 (76)
Haris Rauf 3/64 (10 overs)
Salman Ali Agha 51 (45)
David Willey 3/56 (10 overs)
England won by 93 runs
Umpires: Rod Tucker (Aus) and Paul Wilson (Aus)
Player of the match: David Willey (Eng)
England won the toss and elected to bat.
As a result of this match, New Zealand qualified for the semi-finals and Pakistan were eliminated.[41]
Semi-Final[edit]
16 November 2023
14:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
South Africa 
212 (49.4 overs)
v
 Australia
215/7 (47.2 overs)
David Miller 101 (116)
Mitchell Starc 3/34 (10 overs)
Travis Head 62 (48)
Tabraiz Shamsi 2/42 (10 overs)
Australia won by 3 wickets
Umpires: Richard Kettleborough (Eng) and Nitin Menon (Ind)
Player of the match: Travis Head (Aus)
South Africa won the toss and elected to bat.
David Miller (SA) became the first South African to score a century in a World Cup knockout match.[42]
As a result, Australia qualified for the finals of the World Cup for the eighth time after 1975, 1987, 1996, 1999, 2003, 2007 and 2015.
Quinton de Kock (SA) played in his last ODI.[43]
2016 ICC World Twenty20[edit]
17 March
19:30 (D/N)
Scorecard
Afghanistan 
153/7 (20 overs)
v
 Sri Lanka
155/4 (18.5 overs)
Asghar Stanikzai 62 (47)
Thisara Perera 3/33 (4 overs)
Tillakaratne Dilshan 83* (56)
Mohammad Nabi 1/25 (4 overs)
 Sri Lanka won by 6 wickets
Umpires: Bruce Oxenford (Aus) and Joel Wilson (WI)
Player of the match: Tillakaratne Dilshan (SL)
Afghanistan won the toss and elected to bat.
16 March
15:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
Pakistan 
201/5 (20 overs)
v
 Bangladesh
146/6 (20 overs)
Mohammad Hafeez 64 (42)
Taskin Ahmed 2/32 (4 overs)
Shakib Al Hasan 50* (40)
Shahid Afridi 2/27 (4 overs)
 Pakistan won by 55 runs
Umpires: Ian Gould (Eng) and Richard Kettleborough (Eng)
Player of the match: Shahid Afridi (Pak)
Pakistan won the toss and elected to bat.
Shakib Al Hasan became the second player for Bangladesh to pass 1,000 runs in T20Is.[44]
Shakib Al Hasan also became the second all-rounder to score 1,000 runs and take 50 wickets in T20Is.[44]
19 March
19:30 (D/N)
Scorecard
Pakistan 
118/5 (18 overs)
v
 India
119/4 (15.5 overs)
Shoaib Malik 26 (16)
Suresh Raina 1/4 (1 over)
Virat Kohli 55* (37)
Mohammad Sami 2/17 (2 overs)
 India won by 6 wickets
Umpires: Ian Gould (Eng) and Richard Kettleborough (Eng)
Player of the match: Virat Kohli (Ind)
India won the toss and elected to field.
The start of the match was delayed by a wet outfield and the game was reduced to 18 overs per side.
This was India's eleventh victory against Pakistan in ICC World Cup matches across both ODI and T20I formats.[45]
Ahmed Shehzad became the fifth player for Pakistan to pass 1,000 runs in T20Is.[46]
26 March
15:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
New Zealand 
145/8 (20 overs)
v
 Bangladesh
70 (15.4 overs)
Kane Williamson 42 (32)
Mustafizur Rahman 5/22 (4 overs)
Shuvagata Hom 16* (17)
Grant Elliott 3/12 (4 overs)
 New Zealand won by 75 runs
Umpires: Johan Cloete (SA) and Michael Gough (Eng)
Player of the match: Kane Williamson (NZ)
New Zealand won the toss and elected to bat.
Henry Nicholls (NZ) made his T20I debut.
Mustafizur Rahman became the second bowler for Bangladesh and 16th player overall to take a five-wicket haul in a T20I match.[47]
Bangladesh's total is their lowest total in a T20I match.[48]
Ten dismissals in this match were bowled, the most in a T20I match.[49]
3 April
19:00 (D/N)
Scorecard
England 
155/9 (20 overs)
v
 West Indies
161/6 (19.4 overs)
Joe Root 54 (36)
Carlos Brathwaite 3/23 (4 overs)
Marlon Samuels 85* (66)
David Willey 3/20 (4 overs)
 West Indies won by 4 wickets
Umpires: Kumar Dharmasena (SL) and Rod Tucker (Aus)
Player of the match: Marlon Samuels (WI)
West Indies won the toss and elected to field.
Marlon Samuels (WI) scored the highest total in a World T20 final.[50]
West Indies became the first team to win both the men's and women's World Twenty20s on the same day, with the women defeating Australia by 8 wickets.
1978 ICC Women's Cricket World Cup[edit]
1 January 1978
(scorecard)
India 
63 (39.3 overs)
v
 England
65/1 (30.2 overs)
 England won by 9 wickets
1997 ICC Women's Cricket World Cup[edit]
29 December 1997
Scorecard
New Zealand 
164 (49.3 overs)
v
 Australia
165/5 (47.4 overs)
 Australia won by 5 wickets
2016 ICC Women's World Twenty20[edit]
3 April
14:30
Scorecard
Australia 
148/5 (20 overs)
v
 West Indies
149/2 (19.3 overs)
Elyse Villani 52 (37)
Deandra Dottin 2/33 (4 overs)
Hayley Matthews 66 (45)
Kristen Beams 1/27 (4 overs)
 West Indies won by 8 wickets
Umpires: Aleem Dar (Pak) and Richard Illingworth (Eng)
Player of the match: Hayley Matthews (WI)
Australia won the toss and elected to bat.
First day/night test[edit]
Main article: Bangladeshi cricket team in India in 2019–20
22–26 November 2019
(D/N)
Scorecard
Bangladesh 
v
 India
106 (30.3 overs)
Shadman Islam 29 (52)
Ishant Sharma 5/22 (12 overs)
347/9d (89.4 overs)
Virat Kohli 136 (194)
Al-Amin Hossain 3/85 (22.4 overs)
195 (41.1 overs)
Mushfiqur Rahim 74 (96)
Umesh Yadav 5/53 (14.1 overs)
India won by an innings and 46 runs
Umpires: Marais Erasmus (SA) and Joel Wilson (WI)
Player of the match: Ishant Sharma (Ind)
Bangladesh won the toss and elected to bat.
Notable events[edit]
India's first ever day/night test match, held at Eden Garden on 22 November 2019
Eden Gardens Manual Scoreboard
Eden Gardens Block Map
In 1946, an in-form Syed Mushtaq Ali was dropped from the Indian team selected to play an unofficial test against Australian Services XI. Following crowd protests (with slogans like "No Mushtaq, No Test"), the selectors brought him back to play.[51]
Rioting occurred at the ground during the 1966/67 West Indies and 1969/70 Australian tours.[24]
In 1977, New York Cosmos played a Football match against Mohun Bagan at the stadium. Pelé played in that match for the Cosmos. The match was drawn at 2–2.
16 football fans died in a stampede after a derby league game between East Bengal and Mohun Bagan on 16 August 1980.
Hosted Nehru Cup in 1984, where India national football team played against Argentina, Poland, China PR, Romania U-21 and Vasas Budapest.[52]
Eden Gardens hosted the 1987 Cricket World Cup Final which was first ever Cricket World Cup final hosted outside England. The match ended with Australia defeating England by 7 runs. This was first time Australia won the Cricket World Cup Final.
The 1996 World Cup semi-final was called off and Sri Lanka awarded the match after crowd disturbances following an Indian batting collapse.[24]
During the second final of the 1997 Pepsi Independence Cup, the Test and ODI captains of the Indian cricket team of all time (with a few notable exceptions) were given a lap of honour around the stadium.
In 1999, leading Indian batsman Sachin Tendulkar was run out after colliding with Pakistan's Shoaib Akhtar. Akhtar had impeded Tendulkar and the crowd rioted, forcing the police to evict the spectators. The match continued in front of an empty stadium.
Kapil Dev took an ODI hat-trick against the Sri Lankans in 1991 at the ground.
Harbhajan Singh took a hat-trick against Australia in 2000/01 at the ground. He became the first Indian to take a hat-trick in Test cricket.
In 2000/01, V.V.S. Laxman scored 281 against Australia in the Second Test, 2000–01 Border–Gavaskar Trophy. This remains the highest score at the ground. He was involved in a memorable 376 runs partnership with Rahul Dravid who scored 180. They batted through the whole day 4 of the test match without losing their wickets. Australia were defeated despite enforcing the follow-on. It was only the third time in Test history that a team had won after being forced to follow on.[53] It is widely considered to be one of the greatest Test matches in cricket history.[54]
In 2005, in an ODI against South Africa, the Eden Gardens crowd booed the Indian team and Greg Chappell because of Sourav Ganguly's dropping from the team. Chappell was alleged to have made an obscene gesture towards the crowd from the team bus prior to the match.[55][56]
In 2005, Sachin Tendulkar scored his 10,000th run in Test Cricket against Pakistan on this ground making him the second Indian batsman and fifth overall to achieve this feat.
Eden Gardens hosted the historic 199th (penultimate) Test match of Sachin Tendulkar's career against West Indies from 6-10 Nov 2013. India defeated West Indies by an innings and 51 runs in 3 days.
On its 150th anniversary, on 13 November 2014, Eden Gardens witnessed the highest ever score by a batsman in One Day Internationals, a 264 off 173 balls scored by Rohit Sharma during the fourth One Day International of Sri Lanka vs India at the venue.
On 3 April 2016, in this venue, within a span of hours, the finals of the ICC world cup Twenty20 tournaments for the women and for the men were won by the respective women's and men's teams of the West Indies.
The stadium hosted the 200th and 250th home tests for India in 2005 and 2016 respectively.
On 22 January 2017, Ravindra Jadeja became the first Indian left arm spinner to take 150 One Day International wickets, when he dismissed Sam Billings.
On 21 September 2017, Kuldeep Yadav became the third bowler for India to take a hat-trick in an ODI after Chetan Sharma and Kapil Dev. When he took a hat-trick against Australia.
On 22 November 2019, India's first ever day/night test match between India and Bangladesh was hosted at Eden Gardens and the game was inaugurated jointly by the Chief Minister of West Bengal, Mamata Banerjee and the Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina.[57]
On 5 November 2023, during the Men's Cricket World Cup 2023 group stage match between India and South Africa, Virat Kohli scored his 49th ODI century equalling Sachin Tendulkar's record for the most number of centuries scored by an individual in ODI cricket.
Stats and records[edit]
Panoramic View of the Eden Gardens Stadium during IPL 2008. Note that it was pre-renovation and had benches rather than individual seats. In this configuration, the stadium could seat over 98,000 fans on game day
Matches hosted[edit]
( as on 11 November 2023)
Test — 41
ODI — 36
T20I — 11
Records[edit]
The most runs in Test Matches played here are scored by V.V.S. Laxman (1217 runs),[58] followed by Rahul Dravid (962 runs) and Sachin Tendulkar (872 runs). The most wickets taken here was by Harbhajan Singh (46 wickets) followed by Anil Kumble (40 wickets) and Bishen Singh Bedi (29 wickets).
The most runs in ODIs scored here by a batsman is by Sachin Tendulkar (496 runs), followed by Mohammed Azharuddin (332 runs) and Virat Kohli (326 runs). The most wickets taken here is by Anil Kumble and Kapil Dev (14 wickets each), followed by Ravindra Jadeja (9 wickets).
VVS Laxman and Mohammed Azharuddin have scored 5 centuries each at this venue.
The highest ever ODI individual score of 264 is made by Rohit Sharma on this ground against Sri Lanka in 2014.
On 21 September 2017, Kuldeep Yadav became the third bowler for India to take a hat-trick in an ODI after Chetan Sharma and Kapil Dev. When he took a hat trick against Australia.
The highest runs ever scored in IPL at Eden Gardens[59] were scored on 23 April 2023. This was achieved by Chennai Super Kings against Kolkata Knight Riders. The score was 235/4, letting CSK win by 49 runs. Ajinkya Rahane hit a knock of 71 off of just 29 balls, handing CSK the win against KKR's 186/8, in spite of Jason Roy's 61 off 26 and Rinku Singh's 53 off 33.
The lowest total in the history of IPL - RCB (49/10)
Rajat Patidar hit the highest ever individual score in an IPL match at Eden Gardens with 112 (54 balls) during RCB v LSG in 2022
Sunil Narine's 5/19 is the best bowling figures in the IPL at Eden Gardens.
Eden Gardens Records hide
Category Test Matches ODI Matches T20I Matches
Highest Inning Score 657/d -  India vs  Australia (2001)[60] 404/5 -  India vs  Sri Lanka (2014)[61] 201/5 -  Pakistan vs  Bangladesh (2016)[62]
Lowest Inning Score 90 -  India vs  West Indies (1983)[63] 120/8 -  India vs  Sri Lanka (1996)[64] 70 -  Bangladesh vs  New Zealand (2016)[65]
Largest Victory - by Innings Innings & 336 runs -  West Indies vs  India (1983)[66] — —
Largest Victory - by Runs 329 runs -  South Africa vs  India (1996)[66] 161 runs -  Zimbabwe vs  Kenya (2011)[67] 75 runs -  New Zealand vs  Bangladesh (2016)[65]
Largest Victory - By Wickets 10 Wickets -  Australia vs  India (1969)[66] 10 Wickets -  South Africa vs  India (2005)[67] 6 Wickets -  England vs  India (2011) and  Sri Lanka vs  Afghanistan (2016)[65]
Largest Victory - by Balls Remaining — 90 balls -  India vs  Kenya (1998)[67] 13 balls -  India vs  Pakistan (2016)[65]
Narrowest Victory - by Runs 28 runs -  India vs  England (1972)[68] 2 runs -  India vs  South Africa (1993)[69] 55 runs -  Pakistan vs  Bangladesh (2016)[70]
Narrowest Victory - by Wickets 7 Wickets -  England vs  India (2012)[68] 2 Wickets -  Pakistan vs  India (1987)[69] 4 Wickets -  West Indies vs  England (2016)[70]
Narrowest Victory - by Balls Remaining — 1 ball -  Pakistan vs  West Indies (1989)[69] 2 ball -  West Indies vs  England (2016)[70]

For the films, see Howrah Bridge (1958 film) and Howrah Bridge (2018 film). For the rock formation, see Howrah Natural Bridge.
Howrah Bridge
Night view of the Howrah Bridge
Coordinates 22.5851°N 88.3469°E
Carries 4 lanes[1] of Strand Road,[2] pedestrians and bicycles
Crosses Hooghly River (Ganga River)[3]
Locale Howrah and Kolkata[3]
Official name Howrah Bridge
Other name(s) Gateway of Kolkata
Grand Old Lady of Calcutta
Maintained by Kolkata Port Trust[4]
Characteristics
Design Suspension type Steel bridge[5] and truss arch[6]
Material Steel
Total length 705 m (2,313.0 ft)[7][8]
Width 71 ft (21.6 m) with two footpaths of 15 ft (4.6 m) on either side[5]
Height 82 m (269.0 ft)[6]
Longest span 1,500 ft (457.2 m)[5][6]
Clearance above 5.8 m (19.0 ft)[5]
Clearance below 8.8 m (28.9 ft)[5]
History
Designer M/s. Rendel, Palmer and Tritton[9]
Constructed by Braithwaite, Burn & Jessop Construction Company
Construction start 1936[9]
Construction end 1942[9]
Opened 3 February 1943; 81 years ago[8]
Statistics
Daily traffic 100,000 vehicles and 150,000 pedestrians[10]
Toll Toll-Free on both ways
Location
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
The Howrah Bridge is a balanced steel bridge over the Hooghly River in West Bengal, India. Commissioned in 1943,[9][11] the bridge was originally named the New Howrah Bridge, because it replaced a pontoon bridge at the same location linking the twin cities of Howrah and Kolkata, which are located at the opposite banks of each other. On 14 June 1965, it was renamed Rabindra Setu after the Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore, who was the first Indian and Asian Nobel laureate.[11] It is still popularly known as the Howrah Bridge.
The bridge is one of four on the Hooghly River and is a famous symbol of Kolkata and West Bengal. The other bridges are the Vidyasagar Setu (popularly called the Second Hooghly Bridge), the Vivekananda Setu and the relatively new Nivedita Setu. It carries a daily traffic of approximately 100,000 vehicles[12] and possibly more than 150,000 pedestrians,[10] easily making it the busiest cantilever bridge in the world.[13] The third-longest cantilever bridge at the time of its construction,[14] the Howrah Bridge is currently the sixth-longest bridge of its type in the world.[15]
View of a Ferry with Rabindra Setu
History[edit]
1862 proposal by Turnbull[edit]
In 1862, the Government of Bengal asked George Turnbull, chief engineer of the East Indian Railway Company to study the feasibility of bridging the Hooghly River. He had recently established the company's rail terminus in Howrah. He reported on 19 March, with large-scale drawings and estimates, that:[16]
The foundations for a bridge at Calcutta would be at a considerable depth and cost because of the depth of the mud there.
The impediment to shipping would be considerable.
A good place for the bridge was at Pulta Ghat "about a dozen miles north of Calcutta" where a "bed of stiff clay existed at no great depth under the river bed".
A suspended-girder bridge of five spans of 401 feet (122 m) and two spans 200 feet (61 m) would be ideal.
Pontoon bridge[edit]
The old pontoon bridge that was later replaced by the Howrah Bridge
In view of the increasing traffic across the Hooghly river, a committee was appointed in 1855–56 to review alternatives for constructing a bridge across it.[17] The plan was shelved in 1859–60, to be revived in 1868, when it was decided that a bridge should be constructed and a newly appointed trust vested to manage it. The Calcutta Port Trust was founded in 1870,[9] and the Legislative department of the then Government of Bengal passed the Howrah Bridge Act in the year 1871 under the Bengal Act IX of 1871,[9][17] empowering the lieutenant-governor to have the bridge constructed with Government capital under the aegis of the Port Commissioners.
The Howrah Bridge Act of 1871
Eventually a contract was signed with Sir Bradford Leslie to construct a pontoon bridge. Different parts of the bridge were constructed in England and shipped to Calcutta, where they were assembled. The assembling period was fraught with problems. The bridge was considerably damaged by the great cyclone on 20 March 1874.[8] A steamer named Egeria broke from her moorings and collided head-on with the bridge, sinking three pontoons and damaging nearly 200 feet of the bridge.[8] The bridge was complete in 1874,[9] at a total cost of ₹2.2 million,[17] and opened to traffic on 17 October of that year.[8] The bridge was then 1528 ft long and 62 ft wide, with 7-foot wide pavements on either side.[9] Initially the bridge was periodically unfastened to allow steamers and other marine vehicles to pass through. Before 1906, the bridge used to be undone for the passage of vessels during daytime only. Since June of that year it started opening at night for all vessels except ocean steamers, which were required to pass through during daytime.[17] From 19 August 1879, the bridge was illuminated by electric lamp-posts, powered by the dynamo at the Mullick Ghat Pumping Station.[9] As the bridge could not handle the rapidly increasing load, the Port Commissioners started planning in 1905 for a new improved bridge.
Plans for a new bridge[edit]
In 1906[8] the Port Commission appointed a committee headed by R.S. Highet, chief engineer, East Indian Railway and W.B. MacCabe, chief engineer, Calcutta Corporation. They submitted a report stating that[9]
Bullock carts formed the eight - thirteenths of the vehicular traffic (as observed on 27 August 1906, the heaviest day's traffic observed in the port of Commissioners 16 days' Census of the vehicular traffic across the existing bridge). The roadway on the existing bridge is 48 feet wide except at the shore spans where it is only 43 feet in roadways, each 21 feet 6 inches wide. The roadway on the new bridge would be wide enough to take at least two lines of vehicular traffic and one line of trams in each direction and two roadways each 30 feet wide, giving a total width of 60 feet of road way which are quite sufficient for this purpose [...]
The traffic across the existing floating bridge Calcutta & Howrah is very heavy and it is obvious if the new bridge is to be on the same site as the existing bridge, then unless a temporary bridge is provided, there will be serious interruptions to the traffic while existing bridge is being moved to one side to allow the new bridge to be erected on the same site as the present bridge.
The committee considered six options:
Large ferry steamers capable of carrying vehicular load (set up cost ₹900,000, annual cost ₹438,000)
A transporters bridge (set up cost ₹2 million)
A tunnel (set up cost ₹338.2 million, annual maintenance cost ₹1,779,000)
A bridge on piers (set up cost ₹22.5 million)
A floating bridge (set up cost ₹2,140,000, annual maintenance cost ₹200,000)
An arched bridge
The committee eventually decided on a floating bridge. It extended tenders to 23 firms for its design and construction. Prize money of £3,000 (₹45,000, at the then exchange rate) was declared for the firm whose design would be accepted.[9]
Planning and estimation[edit]
The Howrah Bridge Amendment Act, 1935
The initial construction process of the bridge was stalled due to World War I, although the bridge was partially renewed in 1917 and 1927. In 1921 a committee of engineers named the 'Mukherjee Committee' was formed, headed by R. N. Mukherji, Sir Clement Hindley, chairman of Calcutta Port Trust and J. McGlashan, Chief Engineer. They referred the matter to Sir Basil Mott, who proposed a single span arch bridge.[9] Charles Alfred O'Grady one of the Engineers
In 1922, the New Howrah Bridge Commission was set up, to which the Mukherjee Committee submitted its report. In 1926 the New Howrah Bridge Act passed. In 1930 the Goode Committee was formed, comprising S.W. Goode as president, S.N. Mallick, and W.H. Thompson, to investigate and report on the advisability of constructing a pier bridge between Calcutta and Howrah. Based on their recommendation, M/s. Rendel, Palmer and Tritton were asked to consider the construction of a suspension bridge of a particular design prepared by their chief draftsman Mr. Walton.[9] On basis of the report, a global tender was floated. The lowest bid came from a German company, but due to increasing political tensions between Germany and Great Britain in 1935, it was not given the contract.[8] The Braithwaite, Burn & Jessop Construction Co. was awarded the construction contract that year. The New Howrah Bridge Act was amended in 1935 to reflect this, and construction of the bridge started the next year.[9]
Construction[edit]
The bridge does not have nuts and bolts,[11][18] but was formed by riveting the whole structure. It consumed 26,500 tons of steel, out of which 23,000 tons of high-tensile alloy steel, known as Tiscrom, were supplied by Tata Steel.[8][19] The main tower was constructed with single monolith caissons of dimensions 55.31 m × 24.8 m[5][20] with 21 shafts, each 6.25 metre square.[21] The Chief Engineer of the Port Trust, Mr. J. McGlashan, wanted to replace the pontoon bridge, with a permanent structure, as the present bridge interfered with north–south river traffic. Work could not be started as World War I (1914–1918) broke out. Then in 1926 a commission under the chairmanship of Sir R. N. Mukherjee recommended a suspension bridge of a particular type to be built across the River Hoogly. The bridge was designed by one Mr. Walton of M/s Rendel, Palmer & Triton. The order for construction and erection was placed on M/s.Cleveland Bridge & Engineering Company in 1939. Again World War II (1939–1945) intervened. All the steel that was to come from England were diverted for war effort in Europe. Out of 26,000 tons of steel, that was required for the bridge, only 3000 tons were supplied from England. In spite of the Japanese threat, the then (British) government of India pressed on with the construction. Tata Steel were asked to supply the remaining 23,000 tons of high tension steel. The Tatas developed the quality of steel required for the bridge and called it Tiscrom. The entire 23,000 tons was supplied in time. The fabrication and erection work was awarded to a local engineering firm of Howrah: the Braithwaite, Burn & Jessop Construction Co. The two anchorage caissons were each 16.4 m by 8.2 m, with two wells 4.9 m square. The caissons were so designed that the working chambers within the shafts could be temporarily enclosed by steel diaphragms to allow work under compressed air if required.[21] The caisson at Kolkata side was set at 31.41 m and that at Howrah side at 26.53 m below ground level.[5]
One night, during the process of grabbing out the muck to enable the caisson to move, the ground below it yielded, and the entire mass plunged two feet, shaking the ground. The impact of this was so intense that the seismograph at Kidderpore registered it as an earthquake and a Hindu temple on the shore was destroyed, although it was subsequently rebuilt.[22] While muck was being cleared, numerous varieties of objects were brought up, including anchors, grappling irons, cannons, cannonballs, brass vessels, and coins dating back to the East India Company. The job of sinking the caissons was carried out round-the-clock at a rate of a foot or more per day.[22] The caissons were sunk through soft river deposits to a stiff yellow clay 26.5 m below ground level. The accuracy of sinking the huge caissons was exceptionally precise, within 50–75 mm of the true position. After penetrating 2.1 m into clay, all shafts were plugged with concrete after individual dewatering, with some 5 m of backfilling in adjacent shafts.[21] The main piers on the Howrah side were sunk by open wheel dredging, while those on the Kolkata side required compressed air to counter running sand. The air pressure maintained was about 40 lbs per square inch (2.8 bar), which required about 500 workers to be employed.[13] Whenever excessively soft soil was encountered, the shafts symmetrical to the caisson axes were left unexcavated to allow strict control. In very stiff clays, a large number of the internal wells were completely undercut, allowing the whole weight of the caisson to be carried by the outside skin friction and the bearing under the external wall. Skin friction on the outside of the monolith walls was estimated at 29 kN/m2 while loads on the cutting edge in clay overlying the founding stratum reached 100 tonnes/m.[21] The work on the foundation was completed in November 1938.
By the end of 1940, the erection of the cantilevered arms was commenced and was completed in mid-summer of 1941. The two halves of the suspended span, each 282 feet (86 m) long and weighing 2,000 tons, were built in December 1941. The bridge was erected by commencing at the two anchor spans and advancing towards the center, with the use of creeper cranes moving along the upper chord. 16 hydraulic jacks, each of which had an 800-ton capacity, were pressed into service to join the two halves of the suspended span.[14]
The entire project cost ₹25 million (£2,463,887).[9] The project was a pioneer in bridge construction, particularly in India, but the government did not have a formal opening of the bridge due to fears of attacks by Japanese planes fighting the Allied Powers. Japan had attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941. The first vehicle to use the bridge was a solitary tram.[8]
Howrah Bus Terminus close to Howrah Bridge
The bridge is regarded "The Gateway to Kolkata, as it connects the city to Howrah Station".[citation needed]
Description[edit]
Specifications[edit]
Elevation of Rabindra Setu
When commissioned in 1943, Howrah was the 3rd-longest cantilever bridge in the world,[14] behind Pont de Québec (549 metres (1,801 ft)) in Canada and Forth Bridge (521 metres (1,709 ft)) in Scotland. It has since been surpassed by three bridges, making it the sixth-longest cantilever bridge in the world in 2013. It is a suspension type balanced cantilever[5] bridge, with a central span 1,500 feet (460 m) between centers of main towers and a suspended span of 564 feet (172 m). The main towers are 280 feet (85 m) high above the monoliths and 76 feet (23 m) apart at the top. The anchor arms are 325 feet (99 m) each, while the cantilever arms are 468 feet (143 m) each.[7] The bridge deck hangs from panel points in the lower chord of the main trusses with 39 pairs of hangers.[5] The roadways beyond the towers are supported from ground, leaving the anchor arms free from deck load. The deck system includes cross girders suspended between the pairs of hangers by a pinned connection.[7] Six rows of longitudinal stringer girders are arranged between cross girders. Floor beams are supported transversally on top of the stringers,[7] while themselves supporting a continuous pressed steel troughing system surfaced with concrete.[5]
The longitudinal expansion and lateral sway movement of the deck are taken care of by expansion and articulation joints. There are two main expansion joints, one at each interface between the suspended span and the cantilever arms and there are others at the towers and at the interface of the steel and concrete structures at both approach.[5] There are total 8 articulation joints, 3 at each of the cantilever arms and 1 each in the suspended portion. These joints divide the bridge into segments with vertical pin connection between them to facilitate rotational movements of the deck.[5] The bridge deck has longitudinal ruling gradient of 1 in 40 from either end, joined by a vertical curve of radius 4,000 feet (1,200 m). The cross gradient of deck is 1 in 48 between kerbs.[5]
Traffic[edit]
Bridge traffic
Pedestrians
Traffic Flow for fast moving heavy vehicles[12]
Year Trams Buses/Vans Trucks
1959 13% 41% 46%
1986 4% 80% 16%
1990 3% 82% 15%
1992 2% 80% 18%
1999 - 89% 11%
Traffic Flow for fast moving light vehicles[12]
Year Two-wheelers/Autos Cars/Taxis
1959 2.47% 97.53%
1986 24% 76%
1990 27% 73%
1992 26% 74%
1999 20% 80%
The bridge serves as the gateway to Kolkata, connecting it to the Howrah Station, which is one of the five intercity train terminus stations serving Howrah and Kolkata. As such, it carries the near entirety of the traffic to and from the station, taking its average daily traffic close to nearly 150,000 pedestrians and 100,000 vehicles.[10] In 1946, a census of the daily traffic was taken, which counted 27,400 vehicles, 121,100 pedestrians and 2,997 cattle.[13] The bulk of the vehicular traffic comes from buses and cars. Prior to 1993, the bridge also carried trams. Trams departed from the terminus at Howrah station towards Sealdah, Rajabazar, Shyambazar, High Court, Dalhousie Square, Park Circus, Ballygunge, Tollygunge etc. In 1993, tram service on the bridge was discontinued due to the increasing load on the structure. However, the bridge still continues to carry much more than the expected load. A 2007 report revealed that nearly 90,000 vehicles were plying on the bridge daily (15,000 of which were goods-carrying), though its load-bearing capacity is only 60,000.[23] One of the main reasons for the overloading was that, although vehicles carrying up to 15 tonnes are allowed on the structure, vehicles with 12-18 wheels and carrying loads up to 25 tonnes often plied on it. From 31 May 2007 onwards, overloaded trucks were banned from crossing the bridge and were redirected to the Vidyasagar Setu instead.[24] The road is flanked by footpaths 15 feet (4.6 m) wide, which are thronged with pedestrians.[5]
Maintenance[edit]
View of Howrah Bridge, c. 1945
The Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) is vested with the maintenance of the bridge. The bridge has been subject to damage from vehicles due to rash driving, and corrosion due to atmospheric conditions and biological wastes. In October 2008, 6 high-tech surveillance cameras were placed to monitor the entire 705 metres (2,313 ft) long and 30 metres (98 ft) wide structure from the control room. Two of the cameras were placed under the floor of the bridge to track the movement of barges, steamers and boats on the river, while the other four were fixed to the first layer of beams — one at each end and two in the middle — to monitor vehicle movements. This was in response to substantial damage caused to the bridge from collisions with vehicles, so that compensation could be claimed from the miscreants.[25]
Corrosion has been caused by bird droppings and human spitting. An investigation in 2003 revealed that as a result of prolonged chemical reaction caused by continuous collection of bird excreta, several joints and parts of the bridge were damaged.[10] As an immediate measure, the Kolkata Port Trust engaged contractors to regularly clean the bird droppings, at an annual expense of ₹500,000 (US$6,300). In 2004, KoPT spent ₹6.5 million (US$81,000) to paint the entirety of 2.2 million square metres (24 million square feet) of the bridge. Two coats of aluminium paint, with a primer of zinc chromate before that, was applied on the bridge, requiring a total of 26,500 litres of paint.[26]
The illuminated Howrah Bridge at night
The bridge is also considerably damaged by pedestrians spitting out acidic, lime-mixed stimulants (gutka and paan).[27] A technical inspection by Port Trust officials in 2011 revealed that spitting had reduced the thickness of the steel hoods protecting the pillars from six to less than three millimeters since 2007.[28][29] The hangers need those hoods at the base to prevent water seeping into the junction of the cross-girders and hangers, and damage to the hoods can jeopardize the safety of the bridge. KoPT announced that it will spend ₹2 million (US$25,000) on covering the base of the steel pillars with fibreglass casing to prevent spit from corroding them.[30]
On 24 June 2005, a private cargo vessel M V Mani, belonging to the Ganges Water Transport Pvt. Ltd, while trying to pass under the bridge during high tide, had its funnel stuck underneath for three hours, causing substantial damage worth about ₹15 million to the stringer and longitudinal girder of the bridge.[31] Some of the 40 cross-girders were also broken. Two of four trolley guides, bolted and welded with the girders, were extensively damaged. Nearly 350 metres (1,150 ft) of 700 metres (2,300 ft) of the track were twisted beyond repair.[32] The damage was so severe that KoPT requested help from Rendall-Palmer & Tritton Limited, the original consultant on the bridge from UK. KoPT also contacted SAIL for 'matching steel' used during its construction in 1943.[33] For the repair, which cost around ₹5 million (US$63,000), about 8 tonnes of steel was used. The repairs were completed in early 2006.[34]
Cultural significance[edit]
Pedestrians on the bridge
Howrah Bridge as seen from Howrah
The bridge has been shown in numerous films, such as Bimal Roy's 1953 film Do Bigha Zamin, Ritwik Ghatak's Bari Theke Paliye in 1958, Satyajit Ray's Parash Pathar in the same year, Mrinal Sen's Neel Akasher Neechey in 1959, Shakti Samanta's Howrah Bridge (1958), that featured the famous song Mera Naam Chin Chin Chu and China Town (1962) and Amar Prem (1971), Amar Jeet's 1965 Teen Devian in 1965, Mrinal Sen's 1972 National Award winning Bengali film Calcutta 71 and Sen's Calcutta Trilogy its sequel in 1973, Padatik, Richard Attenborough's 1982 Academy Award winning film Gandhi, Goutam Ghose's 1984 Hindi film Paar, Raj Kapoor's Ram Teri Ganga Maili in 1985, Nicolas Klotz's The Bengali Night in 1988, Roland Joffé's English language film City of Joy in 1992, Florian Gallenberger's Bengali film Shadows of Time in 2004, Mani Ratnam's Bollywood film Yuva in 2004, Pradeep Sarkar's 2005 Bollywood film Parineeta, Subhrajit Mitra's 2008 Bengali film Mon Amour: Shesher Kobita Revisited, Mira Nair's 2006 film The Namesake, Blessy's 2008 Malayalam Film Calcutta News, Surya Sivakumar's 2009 Tamil film Aadhavan, Imtiaz Ali's 2009 Hindi film Love Aaj Kal, Abhik Mukhopadhyay's 2010 Bengali film Ekti Tarar Khonje, Sujoy Ghosh's 2012 Bollywood film Kahaani, Anurag Basu's 2012 Hindi film Barfi!, Riingo Banerjee's 2012 Bengali film Na Hannyate, Rana Basu's 2013 Bengali film Namte Namte, and Ali Abbas Zafar's 2014 Hindi film Gunday and the 2015 YRF release from director Dibakar Banerjee's Detective Byomkesh Bakshy!. Shoojit sircar's "Piku" also features some scenes on this iconic bridge. The bridge was also featured in Garth Davis' Academy Award-nominated 2016 film Lion. Anvita Dutt's 2022 movie Qala (film) features some fictional scenes of Howrah Bridge's construction.

Look for Indian Museum (Jadu Ghar) on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Indian Museum (Jadu Ghar) in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Indian Museum (Jadu Ghar)" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Kalighat Kali Temple
View of the Kalighat Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
Deity Kali
Festivals Kali Puja
Location
Location Kolkata
State West Bengal
Country India
West Bengal
Geographic coordinates 22°31′12″N 88°20′31″E
Architecture
Completed 1809
Website
kalighatkalitemple.com
Kalighat Kali Temple is a Hindu temple in Kalighat, Kolkata, West Bengal, India, dedicated to the Hindu goddess Kali.[1] It is one of the 51 Shakti Pithas in eastern India.[2]
Legend[edit]
The idol of Kali
The term Kalighat originated from the goddess Kali who resides in the temple, and Ghat (riverbank) where the temple is located.[2]
As per mythology, on learning about the death of Sati by self-immolation, Shiva was blinded in rage and started the Tandav Nritya (Dance of Destruction). To prevent the world from eminent destruction, Lord Vishnu used his Sudarshan Chakra to cut the corpse of Sati into 51 pieces, which fell in various places of the Indian subcontinent.[3] Kalighat represents the site where the toes of the right foot of Dakshayani or Sati fell.[citation needed]
History[edit]
The Kalighat Kali temple in its present form is about 200 years old, although it has been referred to in Mansar Bhasan composed in the 15th century, and Kavi Kankan Chandi in the 17th century. The present structure of the temple was completed under the Sabarna Roy Chowdhury family's patronage in 1809. Santosh Roy Chowdhury, a Kali devotee himself, started the construction of the present-day temple in 1798. It took 11 years to complete the construction.[4] The factual authenticity of Roy Chowdhurys' being the traditional patron of the deity is disputed.[5] Pilgrims to the site practice a holy dipping event called Snan Yatra in the temple's Kundupukur tank.[6]

Look for Metro Railway on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Metro Railway in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Metro Railway" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Mother House on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Mother House in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Mother House" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
New Market may refer to:
Bangladesh[edit]
New Market, Dhaka
New Market, Khulna, in Sonadanga Model Thana
New Market, Chittagong, near Government City College, Chittagong
India[edit]
New Market, Bhopal
New Market, Kolkata
Jamaica[edit]
New Market, Jamaica
United States[edit]
New Market, Alabama
New Market, Delaware
New Market, Indiana
New Market, Clark County, Indiana
New Market, Iowa
New Market, Kentucky
New Market, Maryland
New Market, Minnesota
New Market, Missouri
New Market, Hunterdon County, New Jersey
New Market, Middlesex County, New Jersey
New Market, Ohio
New Market (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania), listed on the NRHP
New Market, Pennsylvania
New Market (Greeleyville, South Carolina), listed on the NRHP
New Market, Tennessee
New Market, Virginia
New Market, Washington, a settlement now called Tumwater, Washington
New Market Historic District (disambiguation), a list of places on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
New Market Presbyterian Church (disambiguation)
New Market Township (disambiguation)

Look for Nicco Parks & Resorts Limited on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Nicco Parks & Resorts Limited in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Nicco Parks & Resorts Limited" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Park Street may refer to:
Places in England[edit]
Park Street, Hertfordshire, a village
Park Street, a location in Slinfold parish, West Sussex
Streets in England[edit]
Park Street, Bristol
Park Street, Mayfair, London
Former name of Parks Road, Oxford
Streets elsewhere[edit]
Park Street, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Park Street, Kolkata, India
Park Street, Sydney, Australia

Prinsep Ghat
A view of Princep Ghat in the evening, with the Vidyasagar Setu bridge visible behind it
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
General information
Location Hastings, Kolkata, West Bengal
Country India
Coordinates 22°33′24.41″N 88°19′53.76″E
Prinsep Ghat is a ghat built in 1841 during the British Raj, along the Kolkata bank of the Hooghly River in India. The Palladian porch in the memory of the eminent Anglo-Indian scholar and antiquary James Prinsep was designed by W. Fitzgerald and constructed in 1843.
Located between the Water Gate and the St George's Gate of the Fort William, the monument to Prinsep is rich in Greek and Gothic inlays. It was restored by the state's public works department in November 2001 and has since been well-maintained.[1] In its initial years, all royal British entourages used the Prinsep Ghat jetty for embarkation and disembarkation.[2][3][4]
Prinsep Ghat is one of the oldest recreational spots of Kolkata.[4] People visit it in the evenings on weekends to go boating on the river, stroll along the bank and purchase food from stalls there. A 2-kilometre (1.2 mi) stretch of the beautified riverfront from Prinsep Ghat to Babughat (Baje Kadamtala Ghat) was inaugurated on 24 May 2012.[5] It has illuminated and landscaped gardens and pathways, fountains and renovated ghats. One of the songs in the Bollywood film Parineeta was shot here on the ghats.[4]
Prinsep Ghat also has a railway station named after it. The station is part of the Kolkata Circular Railway which is maintained by Eastern Railway. The station code is PPGT.[6]
There is a jetty nearby called the Man-O-War jetty that belongs to the Kolkata Port Trust and commemorates the role played by the port in the Second World War. The jetty is mainly used by the Indian Navy.
Gallery[edit]
British Man of War alongside Prinsep Ghat ca 1853
Prinsep memorial overlooked by Vidyasagar Setu
Prinsep Ghat railway station
Princep Ghat in the evening
Evening view of Prinsep Ghat
Evening view of Prinsep Ghat
A view of Prinsep Ghat, Kolkata, in the 1900s.
Prinsep Ghat at morning
Sunset from the Princep Ghat
Prinsep Ghat at night
View of the Hooghly River and Vidyasagar Setu from Prinsep Ghat

Science City may refer to:
Cities[edit]
Muñoz, Nueva Ecija, officially Science City of Muñoz since 2000, Philippines
Kansai Science City, Japan
Campuses and research centers[edit]
Science City, Kolkata, a national science center in Kolkata, West Bengal, India
includes the Science City Auditorium, part of an attached convention center
Guangzhou Science City, a technology center in Guangzhou, China
Gujarat Science City, an education center in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Pushpa Gujral Science City, an educational science center in Kapurthala, Punjab, India
Jaipur Science City
Other uses[edit]
Science City at Union Station, a science museum in Kansas City, Missouri, United States
Science City Jena, a basketball team in Jena, Germany
Canada South Science City, a science museum in Windsor, Ontario, Canada
ETH Zurich#Hönggerberg campus, a sustainability project in Switzerland

For other uses, see Victoria Theatre (disambiguation).
Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall
Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Former names Town Hall and Victoria Memorial Hall
General information
Type Theatre, concert hall
Architectural style Neoclassical
Location Singapore
Address 9 Empress Place, Singapore 179556
Coordinates 1°17′17.7″N 103°51′5.9″E
Construction started 1855
Completed 1909
Design and construction
Architect(s) John Bennett
Alexander Murray
Regent A. J. Bidwell
Designations National monument
National monument of Singapore
Designated 14 February 1992
Reference no. 26
Front view during the day
The Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall is a performing arts centre in the Central Area of Singapore, situated along Empress Place. It is a complex of two buildings and a clock tower joined together by a common corridor; the oldest part of the building was first built in 1862, and the complex was completed in 1909. The complex has undergone a number of renovations and refurbishment, mostly recently in 2010 when the complex was closed for a four-year renovation project. It reopened on 15 July 2014.[1][2]
The buildings in the complex have been used for a number of purposes, such as public events, political meetings, exhibitions, musical and stage performances, and for a brief period as a hospital. The concert hall is used as a performance venue by the Singapore Symphony Orchestra (SSO), and the complex is managed by Arts House Limited. The Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall was gazetted as a national monument on 14 February 1992.[3]
History[edit]
Town Hall, Singapore - ca. 1880
The Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall first began as the Town Hall in 1862. In the early 1900s, a second public hall was built next to it joined by a clock tower to form a larger complex.
Town Hall origin[edit]
The Town Hall was originally built to replace the older Assembly Rooms, where local operas and dramas were held but had fallen into disrepair. The foundation stone was laid in 1855, and the building completed in 1862.[4]
The building was designed by the Municipal Engineer, John Bennett. It was built during an era of Victorian Revivalism that was then popular in Britain, and its design therefore reflected this architectural style with Italianate windows, and it was the first such building in Singapore built in this style. The completed town hall originally housed a theatre on the ground floor as well as meeting rooms and offices of various government agencies on the second floor. It also housed the Singapore Library from 1862 to 1876. However, the increase in population resulted in higher demand for entertainment, and the town hall was unable to cope with increasing demand for the use of the building for both entertainment and as administrative purposes, thus by 1893, the offices was moved out of the building.[4]
Construction of Victoria Concert Hall[edit]
Victoria Theatre and Victoria Memorial Hall, 1930s
In 1901, it was decided that a public hall would be built in memory of Queen Victoria who died that year. Public funds for its construction amounting to $368,000 were collected, exceeding the construction costs, thus leaving a surplus of $22,000 for the renovation of the town hall so that it blended in with the new hall.[5] The foundation stone was laid on the occasion of King Edward VII's coronation celebration on 10 August 1902, and the new building was built between 1903 and 1905 next to the Town Hall.
The plan of the memorial hall was initially drawn up by Major Alexander Murray and the Public Works Department, which included the reconstruction of the front elevation of the old town hall on similar lines to the facade of the new memorial hall, which was later on modified by R. A. J. Bidwell of Swan and Maclaren.[5] The new layout of the hall consisted of a stage, stalls and pit on the ground floor and dress circle, promenade and a gallery on top of the foyer.
Construction of Clock Tower and renovation of Town Hall[edit]
The two buildings, the town hall and the Victoria Memorial Hall, were joined together by a clock tower built in 1906 to give the impression of a single building. The 54 metre-high tower connects the two buildings with a common corridor, and is topped by a timepiece donated by the Straits Trading Company. The tower is built on an axial line with the Anderson Bridge nearby. Renovation of the Town Hall began in July 1906. A portico was created on the town hall mirroring that of the new Memorial Hall, thereby creating a unified appearance.
The construction of the signature clock tower was delayed due to delays in the donation of the clock and chimes by the Straits Trading Company. The clock, four metres wide, weighs 1 tonne and cost $6,000.[4] Its dial faces look in four directions, and there is a bell turret above it, capped by a cupola.[6]
Opening[edit]
Statue of Stamford Raffles in front of the clock tower
The Victoria Memorial Hall was officially opened by the Governor of the Straits Settlements, Sir John Anderson, on 18 October 1905. The renovated Town Hall was reopened on 11 February 1909. The Pirates of Penzance was the first performance to be staged in the renovated building when it reopened.[5] The town hall was renamed Victoria Theatre.[7]
On 6 February 1919, the centenary of Singapore's founding, a statue of Stamford Raffles by T. Woolner was moved from the Padang to the front of the Memorial Hall. The statue was complemented with a new semicircular colonnade and a pool.
Historical events and uses[edit]
In World War II, the memorial hall was used as a hospital for victims of bombing raids by Japanese forces during the Battle of Singapore before their successful occupation of the colony. During the occupation, the buildings themselves escaped major physical damage, although the colonnade was destroyed and Raffles's statue moved to the National Museum. The statue was returned to its original site in 1946. In that year Seven Keys to Baldpate was staged, which was Kenneth Williams' début. In 1947 the Straits Settlements coat of arms that was hung on the tympanum of both wings of the building was replaced by the newly formed coat of arms of the Crown Colony of Singapore. It was brought down in 1959 to make a plaster cast of the coat of arms of Singapore, which was topped off with two flagpoles with the flag of Singapore on them.
A number of significant civic as well as historical events were held on the premises. The Memorial Hall was the venue for Japanese war crimes trials from 1946 to 1947. From 1948 onward, the Hall was used during elections as the centre for the briefing of election officials and the counting of ballot papers. On 21 November 1954, it was the venue of the People's Action Party's founding. Two public meetings of the Rendel Commission were held 1953 and 1955 in the hall to review the Constitution of the Colony of Singapore in preparation for its independence.[3] On 15 February 1963, Singapore's pilot television broadcasting service, Television Singapura, was launched here.[3]
Interior of Victoria Concert Hall in 2006, before the latest refurbishment
The town hall underwent major renovation between 1952 and 1958, and it was also internally restructured to allow air-conditioning and soundproofing to be installed. Singapore's national song, “Majulah Singapura “, was performed for the first time at Victoria Theatre in 1958 after the major renovations. In 1979, the Memorial Hall was renovated again to accommodate the Singapore Symphony Orchestra (SSO),[8] at which time it was renamed the Victoria Concert Hall. Additional works up to the 1980s added a gallery to the Concert Hall, increasing seating capacity and enclosing the second storey balconies on the front and back facades with glass.
Refurbishment (2010–2014)[edit]
The refurbished interior of Victoria Concert Hall, 2014
In June 2010, Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall were closed for major renovations. The S$180-million refurbishment was undertaken by W Architects,[4] and Rider Levett Bucknall (RLB) Singapore as the project manager and quantity surveyor, with Architectural Restoration Consultants Pte Ltd (ARC) as its conservator and Arup Singapore Pte Ltd as acoustician and theatre planner. The refurbishment repaired and updated the buildings to meet contemporary standards. The façade of the buildings is retained, and some elements belonging to the original 1905 structure restored. This includes reinstating the central passageway between the theatre and the concert hall, which leads to the Arts House. New spaces were created to accommodate building services and for commercial rental and amenities like a café.[9] While the significant interior features of the concert hall were retained, most of the theatre (save the façade) was completely demolished during the renovations.
Refurbished interior of Victoria Theatre
The building now has extra new spaces for the public, performers and support crew. The theatre has new changing rooms and a loading bay, while the central atrium has been opened up and has become an additional area for hosting arts activities. The roof level of the theatre was raised to match that of the concert hall, and the extra space under the roof houses a new dance studio.[10]
But having new spaces means some sacrifices were necessary. For instance, the theatre now seats fewer people – about 600 from some 900 before – to free up space in what is now the atrium. The concert hall's balcony was also made smaller and higher, so that acoustics are not compromised for those sitting below.[2]
Facilities (1990s–2010s)[edit]
Foyer of Victoria Theatre
The Victoria Theatre had a seating capacity of 904, reduced to 614 after its refurbishment. The Victoria Concert Hall also had a higher capacity of 883 seats originally, but is now reduced to 673, as an unsightly and intrusive balcony inserted during an earlier renovation was removed.[10] Prior to its refurbishment, the theatre had a stage of 167.28 square metres in size, and the concert hall a stage that could be expanded up to 139.76 square metres. The concert hall was considered the venue with the best acoustics in the city, and was the main performance venue for the SSO until the completion of the Esplanade - Theatres on the Bay in 2002 when the orchestra moved its home base to take advantage of superior acoustics and facilities brought about by technological and architectural advances over the years.

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Bandra–Worli Sea Link" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Bandra-Worli Sea Link
Bandra-Worli Sea Link view from Bandra Fort
Coordinates 19.0364°N 72.8172°E
Carries 8-lane (4 lanes in each direction)
Crosses Mahim Bay
Locale Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Official name Rajiv Gandhi Sea Link[1]
Owner Government of Maharashtra
Maintained by Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation (MSRDC)
Characteristics
Design Cable-stayed main spans; concrete-steel precast segment viaducts at either end
Total length 5.6 kilometres (3.5 mi)[2]
Width 2 x 20 metres (66 ft)
Height 126 metres (413 ft)[3]
Longest span 2 x 250 metres (820 ft)[4]
History
Designer Seshadri Srinivasan[5]
Constructed by Hindustan Construction Company (HCC India)
Construction start 2000[6]
Construction end 30 June 2009
Opened 24 March 2010[7]
Statistics
Toll ₹85 (US$1.10) Car
₹110 (US$1.40) LCV
₹145 (US$1.80) Heavy vehicle[8]
Location
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
The Bandra-Worli Sea Link (officially known as Rajiv Gandhi Sea Link[1]) is a 5.6 km long, 8-lane wide cable-stayed bridge that links Bandra in the Western Suburbs of Mumbai with Worli in South Mumbai. It is the longest sea bridge, as well as the 5th longest bridge in India after Mumbai Trans Harbour Link, Bhupen Hazarika Setu, Dibang River Bridge and Mahatma Gandhi Setu. It contains pre-stressed concrete-steel viaducts on either side. It was planned as a part of the proposed Western Freeway that would link the Western Suburbs to Nariman Point in Mumbai's main business district, but is now planned to become part of the Coastal Road to Kandivali.
Bandra-Worli Sea Link During Early Monsoon
The 1M bridge was commissioned by the Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation (MSRDC), and built by the Hindustan Construction Company. The first four of the eight lanes of the bridge were opened to the public on 30 June 2009.[9] All eight lanes became operational on 24 March 2010.
The sea-link reduces travel time between Bandra and Worli during peak hours from 20 - 30 minutes to 10 minutes.[10] As of 2018, BWSL had an average daily traffic of around 32,312 vehicles.[11][12]
History[edit]
The Bandra–Worli Sea Link
Northern viaduct of BWSL in the foreground seen against the Worli skyline. View from Bandra Fort
Sunset View of Bandra Worli Sea Link from Dadar Chowpatty spanning over Mahim Bay
Mahim Causeway was the only road connecting the western suburbs to Mumbai's central business district. This north-southwestern corridor became a bottleneck and was highly congested at peak hours. The Western Freeway project was proposed to span the entire western coastline of Mumbai to ease congestion. The Bandra-Worli Sea Link, a bridge over Mahim Bay, was proposed as the first phase of this freeway system, offering an alternative route to the Mahim Causeway.
The Mujeeb Acharwala Bridge connects the intersection of the Western Express Highway and Swami Vivekanand Road in Bandra to the Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Road in Worli. From Worli Seaface, it connects to Mumbai's arterial Annie Besant Road.
The project was commissioned by the Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation Limited (MSRDC). The contract for construction was awarded to the Hindustan Construction Company (HCC), with project management led by the UK offices of Dar Al-Handasah.[13]
The foundation stone was laid in 1999 by Basitt Acharwala. The original plan estimated the cost at ₹6.6 billion (US$83 million) to be completed in five years.[14] But the project was subject to numerous public interest litigations, with the 5-year delay resulting in the cost escalating to ₹16 billion (US$200 million),[15] with the additional interest cost alone accounting for ₹7 billion (US$88 million).[14]
Planning[edit]
The overall project consisted of five parts, contracted separately to accelerate the overall schedule.
Package I(1): Construction of a flyover over Love Grove junction in Worli
Package II(2): Construction of a cloverleaf interchange at the intersection of the Western Express Highway and S. V. Road in Bandra
Package III(3): Construction of solid approach road from the interchange to the Toll Plaza on the Bandra side along with a public promenade
Package IV(4): Construction of the central cable-stayed spans with northern and southern viaducts from Worli to the Toll Plaza at the Bandra end
Package V(5): Improvements to Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Road
Package IV was the main phase, with the other packages providing supporting infrastructure.
Geology[edit]
Surveys of the seabed under the planned route were conducted before the bridge design commenced. The marine geology underneath the bridge consists of basalts, volcanic tuffs and breccias with some intertrappean deposits. These are overlain by completely weathered rocks and residual soil. The strength of these rocks range from extremely weak to extremely strong and their conditions range from highly weathered and fractured, to fresh, massive and intact. The weathered rock beds are further overlain by transported soil, calcareous sandstone and thin bed of coarse grained conglomerate. The top of these strata are overlain by marine soil layer up to 9m thick consisting of dark brown clay silt with some fine sand overlying weathered, dark brown basaltic boulders embedded in the silt.
Design[edit]
BWSL was designed as the first cable-stayed bridge to be constructed in open seas in India. Due to the underlying geology, the pylons have a complex geometry and the main span over the Bandra channel is one of the longest spans of concrete deck attempted. Balancing these engineering complexities with the aesthetics of the bridge presented significant challenges for the project.
The superstructure of the viaducts were the heaviest precast segments to be built in India. They were built using a span-by-span method using overhead gantry through a series of vertical and horizontal curves.
The 20,000 tonne Bandra-end span of the bridge deck is supported by stay cables within a very close tolerance of deviations in plan and elevation.[16]
The Bandra–Worli Sea Link was the first infrastructure project in Mumbai to use seismic arresters. These will enable it to withstand earthquakes measuring up to 7.0 on the Richter scale.[17]
Foundation and substructure[edit]
The construction of the bridge's structure presented major engineering challenges. These included the highly variable geotechnical conditions due to the underlying marine geology of the seabed. At times, even for plan area of a single pile had a highly uneven foundation bed. Further complications included the presence of a variable intertidal zone, with parts of the foundation bed exposed in low tide and submerged in high tide.
The foundations for the BWSL's cable-stayed bridges consist of 120 reinforced concrete piles of 2,000 millimetres (6.6 ft) diameter. Those for the viaducts consist of 484 piles of 1,500 millimetres (4.9 ft). These 604 piles were driven between 6m and 34m into the substrate in geotechnical conditions that varied from highly weathered volcanic material to massive high strength rocks.
Pylon tower[edit]
BWSL's largest pylon towers are 128 m (420 ft) high
The largest pylons for the bridge consist of diamond shaped 128 metres (420 ft) high concrete tower featuring flaring lower legs, converging upper legs, a unified tower head housing the stays and a continuously varying cross section along the height of tower.
The bridge's pylon towers gradually decrease in cross-section with height. They have horizontal grooves every 3m in height, which permitted inserts. Vertical grooves in the circular sections require special form liners, as well as require attention for de-shuttering. The tower legs are inclined in two directions, which presented challenges in alignment and climbing of soldiers. Construction joints were permitted at 3m intervals only.
To build the pylons, Doka of Austria was commissioned to build a custom automatic climbing shutter formwork system, based on their SKE-100 automatic climbing shutter system. This was fabricated on site and employed to execute all tower leg lifts below deck level.
Pre-cast yard[edit]
The pre-cast yard was located on reclaimed land. The yard catered to casting, storing and handling of 2342 concrete-steel pre-cast segments for the project. The storage capacity requirement of the yard was about 470 precast segments. As the area available was limited, the segments were stored in stacks of up to three layers.
Structure[edit]
BWSL consists of twin continuous concrete box girder bridge sections for traffic in each direction. Each bridge section, except at the cable-stayed portion, is supported on piers typically spaced 50 metres (160 ft) apart. Each section is designed to support four lanes of traffic with break-down lanes and concrete barriers. Sections also provide for service side-walks on one side. The bridge alignment is defined with vertical and horizontal curves.
The bridge consists of three distinct parts: the north end viaduct, the central cable-stayed spans and the south end viaduct. Both the viaducts used precast segmental construction. The cable-stayed bridge on the Bandra channel has a 50m-250m-250m-50m span arrangement and on the Worli channel it has a 50m-50m-150m-50m-50m span arrangement.
Northern and southern viaducts[edit]
The viaducts on either side of the central cable-stayed spans are arranged in 300-metre (980 ft) units consisting of six continuous spans of 50 metres (160 ft) each. Expansion joints are provided at each end of the units. The superstructure and substructure are designed in accordance with IRC codes. Specifications conform to the IRC standard with supplementary specifications covering special items. The foundation consists of 1.5 metres (4 ft 11 in) diameter drilled piles (four for each pier) with pile caps. Bridge bearings are of disc type. The modular expansion joints for the bridge were provided by the Swiss civil engineering firm Mageba.[18]
The viaducts were built utilising pre-cast, post-tensioned, segmental concrete-steel box girder sections. An overhead gantry crane with self-launching capability was custom built on the site to lay the superstructure of the precast segments. The Pre-Cast segments are joined using high strength epoxy glue with nominal pre-stressing initially. The end segments adjacent to the pier are short segments "cast-in-situ joints". Geometrical adjustments of the span are made before primary continuous tendons are stressed.
Segment types are further defined by the changes in the web thickness and type of diaphragms cast in cell. The segment weights vary from 110 to 140 tonnes (110 to 140 long tons; 120 to 150 short tons) per segment. The segment length varies from 3,000 to 3,200 mm (9.8 to 10.5 ft). Deck post tensioning is performed at the completion of the erection of each 50-metre (160 ft) bridge span.
Cable-stayed spans[edit]
Main cable-stayed span
The cable-stayed portion of the Bandra channel is 600 metres (2,000 ft) in length between expansion joints and consists of two 250-metre cable supported main spans flanked by 50 metres conventional approach spans. A centre tower, with an overall height of 128 metres above pile cap level, supports the superstructure by means of four planes of cable stay in a semi-harp arrangement. Cable spacing is 6.0 metres along the bridge deck.
The cable-stayed portion of the Worli channel is 250 metres (820 ft) in length between expansion joints and consists of one 150 metres cable supported main span flanked on each side by two 50 metres conventional approach spans. A centre tower, with an overall height of 55 metres, supports the superstructure above the pile cap level by means of four planes of cable stay in a semi-harp arrangement. Cable spacing here is also 6.0 metres along the bridge deck.
The superstructure comprises twin precast concrete box girders with a fish belly cross sectional shape, identical to the approaches. A typical Pre-Cast segment length is 3.0 metres with the heaviest superstructure segment approaching 140 tonnes. Balanced cantilever construction is used for erecting the cable supported superstructure as compared to span-by-span construction for the approaches. For every second segment, cable anchorages are provided.
A total of 264 cable stays are used at Bandra channel with cable lengths varying from approximately 85 metres to nearly 250 metres. The tower is cast in-situ reinforced concrete using the climbing form method of construction. The overall tower configuration is an inverted "Y" shape with the inclined legs oriented along the axis of the bridge. Tower cable anchorage recesses are achieved by use of formed pockets and transverse and longitudinal bar post-tensioning is provided in the tower head to resist local cable forces.
A total of 160 cable stays are used at Worli channel with cable lengths varying from approximately 30 metres minimum to nearly 80 metres maximum. Like the Bandra channel, the tower here is also cast in-situ reinforced concrete using the climbing form method of construction but the overall tower configuration is "I" shape with the inclined legs. Similarly, tower cable anchorage recesses are achieved by use of formed pockets.
The foundations for the main tower comprise 2-metre-drilled shafts of 25-metre length each. Cofferdam and tremie seal construction have been used to construct the six-metre deep foundation in the dry.
Bridge management[edit]
Toll gates of Bandra-Worli Sea Link
Toll collection[edit]
The Bandra end of the toll plaza has 16 approach lanes. The toll plaza is equipped with an electronic toll collection system.
At both ends, the toll collection options include:
Automatic electronic payment system through On-board Units mounted on vehicles for frequent-commuters that enable vehicles to pass without stopping[19]
Semi-automatic cash-less electronic payment via a smart card in unattended lanes
Manual toll collection for payment by cash, to a toll attendant
Vehicle Toll (Applicable: 01/April/2021)[20]
Single Journey Return Journey Day Pass
Car ₹85 (US$1.10) ₹127.5 (US$1.60) ₹212.5 (US$2.70)
Tempo/LCV ₹130 (US$1.60) ₹195 (US$2.40) ₹325 (US$4.10)
Truck/Bus ₹175 (US$2.20) ₹262.5 (US$3.30) ₹437.5 (US$5.50)
Power supply & lighting[edit]
The Bandra-Worli Sea Link main cable span lit up for first time during construction.
An illuminated Bandra-Worli Sea Link Worli Skyline.
The bridge has a reliable and redundant power supply, backed up by diesel generators and auto mains failure panels for critical loads, such as monitoring, surveillance, emergency equipment and communication services including aviation and obstruction indicators. BWSL exclusively uses energy saving illumination systems.
Surveillance and Security[edit]
An intelligent bridge management system (IBS) provides traffic information, surveillance, monitoring and control systems. It comprises CCTVs, automatic traffic counters and vehicle classification system, variable message signs, remote weather information system and emergency telephones. The control centre is located near the toll plaza along with the electronic tolling controls. The control system uses fibre-optic cables running the entire span of the BWSL. Toll and advanced traffic management systems were installed.
For traffic enforcement, the bridge includes facilities for vehicles to pull over when stopped by enforcement officers or in the event of a breakdown. The bridge uses mobile explosive scanners[21] for vehicles travelling on the sea link.[22][23] Scans take less than 20 seconds for each vehicle with sensors above and below the vehicles. Over 180 cars can be scanned per hour by each scanner.
The pillars and the towers supporting the bridge are protected by buoys designed to withstand explosions and collisions. These inflated buoys surround each pillar of the sea link to avoid any damage.[24]
The BWSL is insured by New India Assurance.[25]
The bridge tower and the control centres feature lightning protection, designed to protect the bridge monitoring, communication and power equipment from possible surges.
Accessibility[edit]
Due to Safety considerations, the BWSL is not accessible to pedestrians, and was not designed for them, according to the MSRDC's Satish Gavai.[26] Two-wheeled, including motorbikes and pedal bicycles, and three-wheeled vehicles are prohibited as well. If caught, riders of such vehicles are subjected to a penalty of ₹1200. Despite stringent security measures, there have been instances where bicyclists and pedestrians have entered from Worli side, as there is no toll both present to prevent their entry, further added by the lack of signages or warnings against entry of bicyclists and pedestrians. Patrolling is enforced however, to keep a check on such incidents. [27][28][29]
The exception to allow bicyclists on Bandra Worli Sea Link is only on the World Environment Day, where mass bicycling is organized every year by Mumbai Police.[30] On rest of the days of the year, bicyclists can be penalized for riding. However, citing the non provision of bicycles in the Motor Vehicles Act, traffic police officers who catch bicyclists red handed have not been able to collect fines from them, despite being an offense under the Bombay Police Act, 1951. The other tactic by the traffic cops to deter bicyclists from entering is to deflate their tires, which has earned criticism and ire from riders, considering that as an act of misconduct.[31]
Panorama Shot of the Bandra-Worli Sea Link (Mumbai)
Criticisms[edit]
The Economic Times criticized the delays and shoddy construction of Bandra–Worli Sea Link. First, the cost was not the projected ₹3 billion but actually cost ₹16 billion or about 23% cost overrun. Second, the project was 5 years behind schedule.[32]
The Financial Express has reported that even eight years after it was thrown open, the daily average traffic on the Bandra-Worli Sea Link — is smaller than a third of the original estimate. In fact, the increase in revenues over the years — ₹66.62 crore in 2010–2011 to ₹70.28 crore in 2011–2012 and to ₹71.04 crore 2012–2013 — has been fairly small.[33] Latest statistics show the daily traffic count on the six-kilometre, predominantly cable-stayed bridge has dropped by over 11% in the past year, from 45,952 vehicles in 2011–2012 to 40,808 in 2012–2013. Over four years from 2009 to 2013, the daily vehicle count has dropped by over 16%. High toll is considered a major contributing factor to people finding the bridge, a less attractive commuting option. Also blamed are congestion towards Pedder Road for south-bound traffic and new flyovers that move north–south traffic on the eastern flank of the city, especially the 2.6 km Lalbaug flyover.[34]
There was also criticism directed at the crumbling road surface on the bridge soon after completion.[35]
The capacity of the bridge is restricted due to a bottleneck at the Worli (south) end of the bridge. While the majority of the 4.7 km (2
+
7⁄8 mi) length has four lanes in each direction, the Worli end has only two lanes for a length of approximately 1.2 km (3⁄4 mi). This leads to backlogs for southbound traffic, especially during morning peak hours.

Website https://cr.indianrailways.gov.in/
History
Opened May 1853; 170 years ago[1]
Rebuilt May 1888; 135 years ago[1]
Electrified 25 kV AC 50 Hz
Previous names Bori Bunder
Victoria Terminus
Location
Mumbai CSMT
Location within India
Show map of India
Show map of Mumbai
Show map of Maharashtra
Show all
Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (officially Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus since 2017, formerly Victoria Terminus (VT), Bombay station code: CSMT (mainline)[4]/ST (suburban)), is a historic railway terminus and UNESCO World Heritage Site in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.[5]
The terminus was designed by a British architectural engineer Frederick William Stevens from an initial design by Axel Haig, in an exuberant Italian Gothic style. Its construction began in 1878, in a location south of the old Bori Bunder railway station,[6] and was completed in 1887, the year marking 50 years of Queen Victoria's rule.
Inside Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, 2022
In March 1996, the station's name was changed from Victoria Terminus to "Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus" (with station code CST) after Shivaji, the 17th-century warrior king and the first Chhatrapati of the Maratha Empire who founded the state in the western Marathi-speaking regions of the Deccan Plateau.[7][8][9]
In 2017, the station was again renamed "Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus" (with code CSMT), where the title Maharaj has literal meaning, "Great king; emperor."[10] Both former initials "VT" and the current, "CST", are also commonly used.[11]
The terminus is the headquarters of India's Central Railway. It is one of the busiest railway stations in India,[12] serving as a terminal for both long-distance and suburban trains with a total number of 18 platforms.
History[edit]
Victoria Terminus[edit]
This famous landmark which has become a symbol of the city, was built as the headquarters of the Great Indian Peninsular Railway.
The railway station was built to replace the Bori Bunder railway station, in the Bori Bunder area of Bombay, a prominent port and warehouse area known for its imports and exports. Since Bombay became a major port city at the time, a bigger station was built to meet its demands, and was named Victoria Terminus, after the then reigning Empress of India, Queen Victoria. The station was designed by Frederick William Stevens, a British engineer architect, attached to the Bombay office of the Indian colonial Public Works Department. Work began in 1878. He received ₹1,614,000 (US$20,000) as the payment for his services.[1] Stevens earned the commission to construct the station after a masterpiece watercolour sketch by draughtsman Axel Haig.[1] The design has been compared to George Gilbert Scott's 1873 St Pancras railway station in London, also in an exuberant Italian Gothic style, but it is far closer to[1][13] Scott's second prize winning entry for Berlin's parliament building, exhibited in London in 1875, which featured numerous towers and turrets, and a large central ribbed dome.[14] The style of the station is also similar to other public buildings of the 1870s in Mumbai, such as the Elphinstone College but especially the buildings of Mumbai University, also designed by G Scott.
The station took ten years to complete,[13] the longest for any building of that era in Mumbai.
Missing statue[edit]
A photo of Victoria Terminus from 1910. Note the seated statue in the canopy under the clock
During its construction, a marble statue of Queen Victoria was installed in the main façade of the building, in a canopy under the clock. In the 1950s, authorities had begun to remove statues of the British figures from government buildings and public spaces based on a directive from the Government of India.[15] Most of the statues, including that of Queen Victoria, were sent to Victoria Gardens (later renamed Rani Baug) where they were left lying on the grass in the open until at least the 1980s. A Right to Information report was filed, but had no records of the missing statue being exported out of India. Historians now believe that the statue was smuggled out, sold by politicians, or destroyed.[16] The symbol of Progress, another statue, featured on the top of the dome, is often mistaken for that of Queen Victoria.
Renaming[edit]
Victoria Terminus, before being renamed to Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus in 1995
The station has been renamed several times. It was built to replace Bori Bunder, the terminus of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway from 1853 to 1888 and was named Victoria Terminus to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria. In 1996, the station was renamed to Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus[17][18] in honour of Shivaji, founder of the Maratha Empire.
In December 2016, the Fadnavis Ministry passed a resolution to change the name to Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus in the Maharashtra Assembly and in May 2017, the home ministry officially sent a letter to the state government denoting the name change, following which the station was yet again renamed as the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus. However, both the former names "VT" as well as "CST" along with the current name "CSMT" are popularly used.[19][20]
2008 Mumbai attacks[edit]
Main article: 2008 Mumbai attacks
On 26 November 2008, two Pakistani terrorists entered the passenger hall of the CST, opened fire and threw grenades at people. The terrorists were armed with AK-47 rifles. One of the terrorists, Ajmal Kasab, was later caught alive by the police and identified by eyewitnesses. The others did not survive. The attacks began around 21:30 when the two men entered the passenger hall and opened fire,[21][22] The attackers killed 58 people and injured 104 others,[22] their assault ending at about 22:45 after they exited the station via the North FOB towards the west to Cama hospital back entrance. The CCTV evidence was used to identify and indict Kasab.[21] In 2010, Kasab was sentenced to death for his role in the attack, and in 2012 he was hanged.[23]
Memorial of 2008 Mumbai Attacks victims killed at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus
Structure[edit]
A 1903 photo of the Victoria Terminus, Bombay which was completed in 1888.
The station building is designed in the High Victorian Gothic style of architecture. The building exhibits a fusion of influences from Victorian Italianate Gothic Revival architecture and classical Indian architecture. The skyline, turrets, pointed arches, and eccentric ground plan are close to classical Indian palace architecture. Externally, the wood carving, tiles, ornamental iron and brass railings, grills for the ticket offices, the balustrades for the grand staircases and other ornaments were the work of students at the Sir Jamsetjee Jeejebhoy School of Art. The station stands as an example of 19th-century railway architectural marvels for its advanced structural and technical solutions. The CSMT was constructed using a high level of engineering both in terms of railway and civil engineering. It is one of the first and finest products of the use of industrial technology, merged with the Gothic Revival style in India. The centrally domed office structure has a 330-foot-long platform connected to a 1,200-foot-long train shed, and its outline provides the skeleton plan for the building. CSMT's dome of dovetailed ribs, built without centering, was considered as a novel achievement of the era.[24]
An evening view of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Teminus.
The interior of the building was conceived as a series of large rooms with high ceilings. It is a utilitarian building and has had various changes required by the users, not always sympathetic. It has a C-shaped plan which is symmetrical on an east–west axis. All the sides of the building are given equal value in the design. It is crowned by a high central dome, which acts as the focal point. The dome is an octagonal ribbed structure with a colossal female figure symbolizing Progress, holding a torch pointing upwards in her right hand and a spoked wheel in her left hand. The side wings enclose the courtyard, which opens on to the street. The wings are anchored by monumental turrets at each of their four corners, which balance and frame the central dome. The façades present the appearance of well-proportioned rows of windows and arches. The ornamentation in the form of statuary, bas-reliefs, and friezes is exuberant yet well controlled. The columns of the entrance gates are crowned by figures of a lion (representing Great Britain) and a tiger (representing India). The main structure is built from a blend of India sandstone and limestone, while high-quality Italian marble was used for the key decorative elements. The main interiors are also decorated: the ground floor of the North Wing, known as the Star Chamber, which is still used as the booking office, is embellished with Italian marble and polished Indian blue stone. The stone arches are covered with carved foliage and grotesques.[25] Internally, the ceiling of the booking hall was originally painted blue, gold and strong red on a ground of rich blue with gold stars. Its walls were lined with glazed tiles made by Maw & Co of Britain.[16] Outside, there are statues representing Commerce, Agriculture, Engineering and Science, with a statue representing Progress on the central dome of the station.[16]
Platforms[edit]
CSMT has a total of 18 platforms—seven platforms are for suburban EMU trains and eleven platforms (Platform 8 to Platform 18) are for long-distance trains. Rajdhani, Duronto, Garib Rath and Tejas Express leave from Platform No. 18.[26] Air-conditioned dormitories were inaugurated at CST on 16 April 2013. The facility has 58 beds for men and 20 for women.[27]
In popular culture[edit]
The station has been the location of filming the "Jai Ho" song in Slumdog Millionaire;[28] and the 2011 Indian film Ra.One.[29]

For the fort in Alibaug, see Kolaba Fort.
Colaba
Kolābā
Neighbourhood
Colaba
Coordinates: 18.91°N 72.81°E
Country India
State Maharashtra
District Mumbai City
City Mumbai
Zone 1
Ward A
Government
 • Type Municipal Corporation
 • Body Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC)
Elevation 4 m (13 ft)
Languages
 • Official Marathi
Time zone UTC+5:30 (IST)
PIN
400005[1]
Area code 022
Vehicle registration MH 01
Lok Sabha Constituency Mumbai South
Vidhan Sabha Constituency Colaba
Civic agency BMC
Colaba ([koˈlaːbaː]; or ISO: Kolābā) is a part of the city of Mumbai, India. It is one of the four peninsulas of Mumbai while the other three are Worli, Bandra and Malabar Hill. During Portuguese rule in the 16th century, the island was known as Kolbhat. After the British took over the island in the late 17th century, it was known as Kolio.[citation needed]
Marine Drive, looking at Nariman Point and Colaba
History[edit]
Seven Islands of Mumbai, before reclamation
The name Colaba comes from Kolabhat, a word in the language of Kolis, the indigenous inhabitants of the islands, before the arrival of the Portuguese.[2] The area that is now Colaba was originally a region consisting of two islands: Colaba and Little Colaba (or Old Woman's Island). The island of Colaba was one of the Seven Islands of Mumbai ruled by the Portuguese.
The Portuguese had acquired these lands from the Sultanate of Cambay by the Treaty of Vasai (1534). The group of islands was given by Portugal to Charles II of England as a dowry when he married Catherine of Braganza in 1661. The cession of Mumbai and dependencies was strongly resented by Portuguese officials in Goa and Mumbai, who resisted transfer of possession for several years, while the English representatives were confined to the island of Anjediva while negotiations continued. Angered by the back-tracking, Charles II leased these lands to the British East India Company for a nominal annual rent. Gerald Aungier, second Governor (1672), and the president of the English settlement of Surat, took possession of Colaba and Old Woman's Island on behalf of the Company in 1675.
Portugal continued to hold Little Colaba island for several decades more before ceding it to the English in about 1762, subject to the retention of Portuguese ownership of a house on the island, that is now the Blessed Sacrament Chapel in Middle Colaba. This was leased by the Portuguese Government of Goa to the Bishop of Damao, the head of the Padroado party in Mumbai, as his residence. After an attempt by the Propaganda Fide party to seize the chapel, a court ruled that the house remained the property of the Government of Portugal and evicted the Propaganda Fide party.
Old Mumbai, 1909
Ambitious reclamation plans from 1912 have been only partly realised.
Colaba Chapel, Mumbai (Clutterbuck, 1889, p. 173)[3]
In 1743, British Colaba was leased to Richard Broughton at Rs. 200 yearly, and the lease was renewed in 1764.[4] By 1796, Colaba had become a cantonment. Colaba was known for the variety of fishes – the bombil (Bombay duck), rawas, halwa, turtles, crabs, prawns and lobsters.
A Colaba Observatory, a meteorological observatory was established in 1826 in the part that was called Upper Colaba. The Colaba Causeway was completed in 1838, and thus, the remaining two islands were joined to the others. Gradually, Colaba became a commercial center, after the Cotton Exchange was opened at Cotton Green in 1844. The real estate prices in the area went up. The Colaba Causeway was widened in 1861 and 1863.
One of the Colonial-era buildings opposite Regal Cinema
Colaba became a separate municipality ward in 1872. The Sick Bungalows (now known as INHS Asvini) were built in the 19th century. The construction of the Afghan Church after the First Afghan War of 1838) began in 1847. The Church was consecrated in 1858, with the work on the steeple being concluded in 1865.
The horse-drawn tram-cars were introduced in 1873 by Stearns and Kitteredge, who had their offices on the west side of the Causeway, where the Electric House now stands.
The Prong's lighthouse was constructed at the southern tip of the island in 1875. The eponymous Sassoon Docks were built by David Solomon Sassoon on reclaimed land in the same year. The BB&CI Railways established the Colaba railway station or terminus, the site of which is now occupied by the Badhwar Park layout. The development of Colaba pushed the native kolis to the edges of the island.
The Mumbai City Improvement Trust reclaimed around 90,000 square yards (75,000 m2) on the western shore of Colaba. Eminent citizens of Mumbai, such as Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, opposed the work, fearing that the reclamation would depress prices of land. However, the reclamation work continued and was completed in 1905. There was no fall in the land prices. In 1906, a seafront road with a raised sea-side promenade was completed, and named as "Cuffe Parade" after T. W. Cuffe of the Trust.
Present day[edit]
The Gateway of India, the art deco style Regal Theatre, the cafes (Café Mondegar, Cafe Royal and Leopold Cafe), and the Taj Mahal Palace & Tower, Royal Bombay Yacht Club, Bademiya Restaurant and Bagdadi restaurant, as well as a number of modern pubs, restaurants and clubs all add to the atmosphere. The southern tip is occupied by a military cantonment, including the large Navy Nagar layout built on reclaimed land known as Holiday Camp. The older parts of the cantonment retains its large, wooded spaces and is the only bit of green left in this otherwise congested area. In the midst of Navy Nagar lies the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), one of India's leading scientific institutions. Colaba is renowned for high-end boutiques and imitation consumer goods, and is popular with tourists. Notable residents include Ratan Tata, Anil Ambani, and Ravi Shastri. Colaba Causeway, or just "Causeway" as it is known in Mumbai, offers everything from bracelets to perfumes to clothes to watches, clocks, DVDs and CDs. It has an old English charm and a very modern feel as well. Colaba is also the art center of Mumbai, with all the major galleries and museums located in and around this area.[5] Even today, in 2020, the government has managed to preserve most of its colonial-era architectures.
A 180° panoramic view of Colaba.
Colaba is home to the Cooperage Football Ground.
Transport[edit]
Nearest railway stations:
Churchgate
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus ("CSMT", Victoria Terminus)
Visitor attractions[edit]
Colaba Causeway
Colaba Observatory
Cowasji Jehangir Hall
Ballard Estate
Cathedral of the Holy Name
Prong's Lighthouse
Gateway of India
Sassoon Docks
David Sassoon Library
Gallery[edit]
Cafe Mondegar on Colaba Causeway
Colaba Apartments
Colaba Causeway construction, view from Colaba island, 1826
Terrorist attack in November 2008[edit]
Main article: November 2008 Mumbai attacks
On 26 November 2008, terrorist strikes occurred at various places in and near Colaba, notably the Taj Mahal Palace & Tower, Leopold Café, Marine Drive and Mumbai Chabad House. The attacks resulted in over 100 deaths and significant damages.

UNESCO World Heritage Site
The 5.45 metres (17.9 ft) high Trimurti sculpture
Location Elephanta Island, Maharashtra, India
Criteria Cultural: i, iii
Reference 244
Inscription 1987 (11th Session)
Coordinates 18°57′48″N 72°55′53″E
Location of Elephanta Caves
The Elephanta Caves are a collection of cave temples predominantly dedicated to the Hindu god Shiva, which have been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.[1][2][3] They are on Elephanta Island, or Gharapuri (literally meaning "the city of caves"),[4] in Mumbai Harbour, 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) east of Mumbai in the Indian state of Mahārāshtra. The island, about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) west of the Jawaharlal Nehru Port, consists of five Hindu caves, a few Buddhist stupa mounds that date back to the 2nd century BCE,[5][6][7] and two Buddhist caves with water tanks.[8][9]
The Elephanta Caves contain rock-cut stone sculptures, mostly in high relief, that show syncretism of Hindu and Buddhist ideas and iconography.[7][10][11] The caves are hewn from solid basalt rock. Except for a few exceptions, much of the artwork is defaced and damaged.[12] The main temple's orientation as well as the relative location of other temples are placed in a mandala pattern.[6] The carvings narrate Hindu mythologies, with the large monolithic 5.45 metres (17.9 ft) Trimurti Sadashiva (three-faced Shiva), Nataraja (Lord of dance) and Yogishvara (Lord of Yogis) being the most celebrated.[6][13][14]
These date to between the 5th and 9th centuries, and scholars attribute them to various Hindu dynasties.[2][6] They are most commonly placed between the 5th and 7th centuries. Many scholars consider them to have been completed by about 550 CE.[3][15][16]
They were named Elefante—which morphed to Elephanta—by the colonial Portuguese who found elephant statues on the caves. They established a base on the island. The main cave (Cave 1, or the Great Cave) was a Hindu place of worship until the Portuguese arrived, whereupon the island ceased to be an active place of worship.[6] The earliest attempts to prevent further damage to the caves were started by British India officials in 1909.[17] The monuments were restored in the 1970s.[6] It is currently maintained by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).[10][11]
Geography[edit]
A sketch of the Elephanta Caves in 19th and early 20th century. The broken pillars seen in the right image were restored in the 1970s.
Elephanta Island, or Gharapuri, is about 11 km (6.8 mi) east of the Gateway of India in the Mumbai Harbour and less than 2 km (1.2 mi) west of Jawaharlal Nehru Port. The island covers about 10 km2 (3.9 sq mi) at high tide and about 16 km2 (6.2 sq mi) at low tide. Gharapuri is a small village on the south side of the island.[7] The Elephanta Caves is connected by ferry services from the Gateway of India, Mumbai between 9AM and 2PM daily, except Monday when the Caves are closed. Mumbai has a major domestic and international airport, as well as is connected to the Indian Railways.[18]
The island is 2.4 km (1.5 mi) in length with two hills that rise to a height of about 150 m (490 ft). A narrow, deep ravine separates the two hills and runs from north to south. On the west, the hill rises gently from the sea and stretches east across the ravine and rises gradually to the extreme east to a height of 173 m (568 ft). Forest growth with clusters of mango, tamarind, and karanj trees cover the hills with scattered palm trees. The foreshore is made up of sand and mud with mangrove bushes on the fringe. Landing quays sit near three small hamlets known as Set Bunder in the north-west, Mora Bunder in the northeast, and Gharapuri or Raj Bunder in the south.[7]
There are five rock-cut caves in the western hill and a brick stupa on the eastern hill. The eastern hill has two Buddhist mounds and is called the Stupa hill. Close to the five western hill caves, are Cave 6 and 7 on the eastern hill. The most visited and significant cave is on the western hill and is called Cave 1 or the Great Cave, located about a kilometre walk up a steep graded uphill.[10][19] The Elephanta island is a protected monument area as per the requirements of UNESCO. A notification was issued by the Government of India in 1985 declaring a buffer zone that outlines "a prohibited area" that stretches 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) from the shoreline.[20]
Description[edit]
Overview of Elephanta Caves site
The island has two groups of rock-cut caves, hewn from solid basalt rock. The larger group of caves, which consists of five caves on the western hill of the island, is well known for its Hindu sculptures. The primary cave, numbered as Cave 1, is about 1.0 km (0.62 mi) up a hillside, facing the Mumbai harbour. Caves 2 through 5 are next to Cave 1 further southeast, arranged in a row. Cave 6 and 7 are about 200 m (660 ft) northeast of Cave 1 and 2, but geologically on the edge of the eastern hill.[10]
The two hills are connected by a walkway. The eastern hill is also called the Stupa hill, while the western hill is called the Canon hill, reflecting their historic colonial-era names, the ancient Stupa and the Portuguese era firing Canons they host respectively.[2]
All the caves are rock-cut temples that together have an area of 5,600 m2 (60,000 sq ft). At their most elaborate, they have a main chamber, two lateral chambers, courtyards, and subsidiary shrines, but not all are so fully developed. Cave 1 is the largest and is 39 metres (128 ft) deep from the front entrance to the back. The temple complex is primarily the abode of Shiva, depicted in widely celebrated carvings which narrate legends and theologies of Shaivism.[10][20] However, the artwork reverentially displays themes from Shaktism and Vaishnavism traditions of Hinduism as well.[21][22]
Cave 1: Main, Great Cave[edit]
The main cave, also called Cave 1, Grand Cave or the Great Cave, is 39.63 metres (130.0 ft) square in plan with a hall (mandapa).[12] The basic plan of the cave can be traced back to the plan of the ancient Buddhist viharas, consisting of a square court surrounded by cells, built from about 500 to 600 years before in India.[23] The Cave has several entrances, the main entrance is unassumingly small and hides the grand hall inside. The main entrance faces north, while two side entrances face east and west. The cave's main entrance is aligned with the north–south axis, unusual for a Shiva shrine (normally east–west).[10][20][2] However, inside is an integrated square plan Linga shrine (garbha-griya) that is aligned east–west, opening to the sunrise.[12]
Elephanta main cave plan. The 6th century temple follows a mandala design, according to George Michell.[24]
Shiva linga in elephanta cave at west side
Layout (3D Google Arts & Culture tour):
1. Ravananugraha
2. Shiva-Parvati, Mount Kailash
3. Ardhanarishvara
4. Sadashiva Trimurti
5. Gangadhara
6. Wedding of Shiva
7. Shiva slaying Andhaka
8. Nataraja
9. Yogishvara
16. Linga
East Wing Shrine
10. Kartikeya
11. Matrikas
12. Ganesha
13. Dvarapala
West Wing Shrine
14. Yogishvara
15. Nataraja
To reach the main cave, a visitor or pilgrim has to walk up 120 steep steps from the beach or take the tourist toy train. At the main entrance are four pillars, with three open porticoes and an aisle at the back. Pillars, six in each row, divide the hall into a series of smaller chambers. The roof of the hall has concealed beams supported by stone columns joined together by capitals.[20][2]
Main entrance, Cave 1
Side entrance
Main mandapa and pillars
The temple is enclosed in the cave, it has interior walls but no exterior wall. The pillars create space and symmetric rhythm as they support the weight of the hill above. The main mandapa recesses into a pillared vestibule (ardha-mandapa) on the south side, while a pillared portico (mukha-mandapa) connects it to the main entrance. Embedded within the Great Cave are dedicated shrines, the largest of which is the square plan Linga shrine (see 16 in plan).[12] It is a square garbha-griya (womb house) with four entrances, located in the right section of the main hall. Steps lead from the four doorways into the sanctum, which has a linga in the mulavigraha style. Each doorway is guarded by a dvarapala on each side, for a total of eight dvarapalas, their heights spanning floor to the ceiling.[25] These were badly damaged when the Portuguese ceded control of this region to the British. The linga shrine is surrounded by a mandapa and circumambulation path (pradakshina-patha) as in other Hindu temples. The pillars are similarly aligned east–west to this shrine and have an east entrance. Overlaid, as if fused, on the architecture of this temple is another open temple aligned to the north–south direction with three faced Sadashiva as its focal centre. One features the abstract, unmanifest, aniconic symbol of Shiva, the other anthropomorphic, manifest, iconic symbol of Shiva. The mandapa pillars of the two align up.[25]
The northern entrance to the cave is flanked by two panels of Shiva dated to the Gupta period, both damaged. The left panel depicts Yogishvara (Shiva as the Lord of Yoga) and the right shows Nataraja (Shiva as the Lord of Dance).[26] The Sadashiva is flanked by two large friezes, one of Ardhanarishvara and the other of Gangadhara.[27] The walls of the mandapa feature other Shaivism legends. All the friezes, states Stella Kramrisch, feature the vyaktavyakta concept of Samkhya, where the state of spiritual existence transitions between the unmanifest-manifest, the figures leap out of the cave walls towards the spectator as if trying to greet the narrative. Even the manifested Sadashiva is shown to be rising out of the rocks.[27]
Each wall has large carvings of Shiva-related legends, each more than 5 metres (16 ft) in height. The central Shiva relief Trimurti is located on the south wall opposite the main entrance. Also called the Sadashiva, it is the iconic form of a pancamukha linga is set in a mandala pattern with the abstract linga form of Shiva.[28] The Sadashiva is a colossal carving, a bit over 6.27 metres (20.6 ft), depicting Tatpurusha (Mahadeva), Aghora (Bhairava), Vamadeva (Uma) and Sadyojata (Nandin).[28] The carving is unusual because the standard ancient Hindu texts for murti design state that the Tatpursha should face east, but in Elephanta it is the north face (pointing towards the main entrance).[28]
Smaller shrines are located at the east and west ends of the caves. The eastern sanctuary serves as a ceremonial entrance, and its shrine shows iconography of Shaktism tradition.[20][2]
Sadashiva: Trimurti[edit]
Trimurti Shiva flanked by the dvarapalas
The Trimurti is considered a masterpiece and the most important sculpture in the caves.[29] It is carved in relief on the south wall of the cave facing the north entrance, along the north–south axis. It is also known as Sadashiva and Maheshmurti. The image, 5.45 m (17.9 ft) in height, depicts a three-headed Shiva, representing Panchamukha Shiva.[30]
The three heads represent three essential aspects of Shiva: creation, protection, and destruction.[31] As per another version, the three heads symbolise compassion and wisdom.[32] The right half-face (west face) shows him holding a lotus bud, depicting the promise of life and creativity. This face is symbolism for Brahma, the creator or Uma or Vamadeva, the feminine side of Shiva and creator.[31] The left half-face (east face) is that of a moustached young man. This is Shiva as the terrifying Aghora or Bhairava, the chaos creator and destroyer.[31] This is also known as Rudra-Shiva, the Destroyer. The central face, benign and meditative Tatpurusha, resembles the preserver Vishnu. This is the Shiva form as the "master of positive and negative principles of existence and preserver of their harmony".[10][20] The three-headed Shiva are his creator, preserver and destroyer aspects in Shaivism. They are equivalently symbolism for Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma, they being equivalent of the three aspects found in Shaivism.[29][31]
Gangadhara[edit]
Shiva bringing Ganges River to earth.
The Trimurti Shiva is flanked on its left by Ardhanarisvara (a half-Shiva, half-Parvati composite) and Gangadhara legend to its right. The Gangadhara image to the right of the Trimurti shows Shiva and Parvati standing. Shiva brings the Ganges River down from the heavens and her immense power is contained effortlessly in Shiva's hair as she descends from heaven. The artists carved a small three bodied goddess up high, a symbolism for Ganges, Yamuna and Saraswati. The mother goddess Parvati stands tall next to Shiva, smiling. The carving is 4 m (13 ft) wide and 5.207 m (17.08 ft) high.[33]
The Gangadhara image is highly damaged, particularly the lower half of Shiva seen seated with Parvati, who is shown with four arms, two of which are broken. From the crown, a cup with a triple-headed female figure (with broken arms) to depict the three major rivers in Hindu texts. An alternative interpretation of the three-bodied goddess in Gangadharamurti panel here and elsewhere is that it represents the regenerative powers of rivers in the form of Mandakini, Suradhani and Bhagavati.[33] In this grotto scene, Shiva is sculpted and bedecked with ornaments, while gods gather to watch the cosmic source of earthly abundance. The gods and goddesses shown are identifiable from the vahana (vehicle) and icons, and they include Brahma (left), Indra (left), Vishnu (right), Saraswati, Indrani, Lakshmi, and others.[33][34]
Wrapped on one of the arms of Shiva is his iconic coiling serpent whose hood is seen near his left shoulder. Another hand (partly broken) gives the semblance of Shiva hugging Parvati, with a head of matted hair. A damaged ornamented drapery covers his lower torso, below the waist. Parvati is carved to the left of Shiva with a coiffured hair dress, fully bedecked with ornaments and jewellery.[34] Between them stands a gana (dwarf jester) expressing confused panic as to whether Shiva will be able to contain the mighty river goddess. In the lower left of the panel is a kneeling devout figure in namaste posture representing the heroic mythical king Bhagiratha who worked hard to bring the river of prosperity to his earthly kingdom, but unaware of the potentially destructive forces that came with it.[34]
Ardhanarishvara[edit]
Ardhanarishvara (centre): half female (Parvati) and half male (Shiva), feminine-masculine equivalence.
On the wall to the east of the Trimurti is a damaged four-armed Ardhanarishvara carving. This image, which is 5.11 m (16.8 ft) in height. It represents the ancient Hindu concept of essential interdependence of the feminine and the masculine aspects in the universe, for its creation, its sustenance and its destruction.[35][36] It is represented as half woman shown as half of Parvati in this Elephanta panel on the right side, with breast, waist, feminine hair and items such as a mirror in the upper hand. The second half-man side is Shiva with male characteristics and items iconographically his symbol. In Shaivism, the concept pictorially symbolises the transcendence of all duality including gender, with the spiritual lacking any distinctions, where energy and power (Shakti, Parvati) is unified and is inseparable with the soul and awareness (Brahman, Shiva).[35][37][38]
In the panel, the relief shows a headdress (double-folded) with two pleats draped towards the female head (Parvati) and the right side (Shiva) depicting curled hair and a crescent. The female figure has all the ornamentation (broad armlets and long bracelets, a large ring in the ear, jewelled rings on the fingers) but the right male figure has drooping hair, armlets and wristlets. One of his hands rests on Nandi bull's left horn, Shiva's mount, which is fairly well preserved.[39][40] The pair of hands at the back is also bejewelled; the right hand of the male side holds a serpent, while the left hand of the female side holds a mirror. The front left hand is broken, while a large part of the lower half of the panel was damaged at some point. Around the Ardhanarishwara are three layers of symbolic characters. The lowest or at the same level as the viewer are human figures oriented reverentially towards the androgyne image. Above them are gods and goddesses such as Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and others who are seated on their vahanas. Above them are flying apsaras approaching the fused divinity with garlands, music, and celebratory offerings.[39]
Shiva slaying Andhaka[edit]
Shiva slaying Andhaka
The panel in the northwest side of the cave, on the wall near west entrance and the Linga shrine (see 7 in plan), is an uncommon sculpture about the Andhakasura-vadha legend.[41] It shows Bhairava, or Virabhadra, a ferocious form of Shiva killing the demon Andhaka (literally, "blind, darkness"). The relief is much ruined below the waist, is 3.5 m (11 ft) high and posed in action. Though a relief, it is carved to give it a three dimensional form, as if the ferocious Shiva is coming out of the rocks and impaling Andhaka with his trident.[42][43]
Bhairava's headgear has a ruff on the back, a skull, and a cobra over the forehead, and the crescent high on the right. His facial expression is of anger, the conviction of something he must do, and one in the middle of the action. The legs and five of the eight arms are broken, attributed to Portuguese vandalism. The smaller broken image Andhaka is seen below Bhairava's image.[7] Also depicted in his right hand is the symbolic weapon that Shaiva mythology states Shiva used to kill the destructive elephant demon.[43] A hand holds a bowl to collect the blood dripping from the slain Andhaka, which Shaiva legend states was necessary because the dripping blood had the power to become new demons if they got nourished by the ground.[43][44] Furthermore, the artwork shows ruined parts of a male and two female forms, figures of two ascetics, a small figure in front, a female figure, and two dwarfs.[7] The uppermost part shows flying apsaras bringing garlands.[43]
Wedding of Shiva[edit]
Kalyanasundara: the wedding of Shiva and Parvati
The niche image carved on the southwest wall, near the Linga shrine (see 6 on plan) is the wedding of Shiva and Parvati. This legend is called the Kalyanasundara in Hindu texts.[41] Parvati is seen standing to Shiva's right, the customary place for a Hindu bride at the wedding. The carvings are substantially damaged, but the ruined remains of the sculpture have been significant to scholarly studies of Hindu literature. In many surviving versions of the Puranas, the wedding takes place in King Parvata's palace. However, in this Elephanta Cave panel, the narrative shows some earlier version.[45] Here King Parvata standing behind Parvati gives away the bride to Shiva while Brahma is the priest in the grotto relief.[45] Gods, goddesses and celestial apsaras are cheering witness to the wedding. Vishnu is witness to the marriage, standing tall behind the sitting Brahma on the right side of the panel. Just above the main images rishi (sages) and a few characters hanging from the ceiling are seen blessing the wedding.[7]
The groom Shiva is shown calm and young, while Parvati is depicted as shy and emotional. Her head is tilted towards him and her eyelids joyfully lowered, while his hand (now broken) is holding hers.[45] Their dress reflect the Hindu customs. He wears the sacred thread across his chest, she the customary jewellery. The other characters shown in the wedding carry items or are shown holding items that typically grace a Hindu wedding. Chandra (moon god), for example, holds a traditionally decorated water vessel (kalash). Brahma, the priest, is squatting on the floor to the right tending the yajna fire (agni mandapa).[45]
Yogishvara: Lord of Yoga[edit]
Shiva as Yogishvara, god of Yoga.
The panel in the east side of the portico next to the north entrance (see 9 on plan) is Shiva in Yoga. This form of Shiva is called Yogishvara, Mahayogi, Lakulisa.[46][41]
Shiva, states Stella Kramrisch, is the "primordial yogi" in this panel. He is the master of discipline, the teacher of Yoga arts, the master who shows how yoga and meditation leads to the realisation of ultimate reality.[47][48][49]
The relief is in a dilapidated condition with most of the arms and legs broken.[7] He is seated in padmasana lost in his meditation. His posture is well formed and suggests that the 6th century artist knew this asana. He sits on a lotus with a stalk shown as if coming out of the earth, his legs are crossed symmetrically. Two Nagas flank the lotus and express their reverence with a namaste posture. The great yogi is being approached by various Vedic and Puranic gods and goddesses, as well as monks and sadhus, yet there is a halo around him that keeps them at bay as if they admire it but do not wish to disturb his meditation.[47][49][50]
In some ways, the yogi artwork shown in this Hindu cave are similar to those found in Buddhist caves, but there are differences. Yogi Shiva, or Lakulisa, wears a crown here, his chest is shown vaulting forward as if in breathing exercises found in Hindu yoga texts, the face and body expresses different energy. This Shiva yogi comes across as the "lord of the caves" or Guhesvara in medieval Indian poetry, states Kramrisch.[47] According to Charles Collins, the depiction of Shiva as Yogi in Elephanta Cave 1 is harmonious with those found in the Puranas dated to early and mid 1st millennium CE.[51]
Nataraja: Lord of Dance[edit]
Shiva as Nataraja, god of dance.
The panel facing the Yogishvara, on the west side of the portico next to the north entrance (see 8 on plan) is Shiva as the Nataraja, "cosmic dancer" and "the lord of dancers".[46] It is also called the Nrittamurti.[41]
The badly damaged relief panel is 4 m (13 ft) wide and 3.4 m (11 ft) high and set low on the wall. His body and arms are shown as wildly gyrating in the lalita mudra, a symbolism for occupying all of space, soaring energy and full bodied weightlessness. His face here resembles the Tatpurusha, or the manifested form of Shiva that preserves and sustains all of creation, all of creative activity.[52][53] This is an eight-armed depiction of Nataraja. The parts of the panel that have survived suggest that he is holding an axe, a coiled serpent is wrapped around its top. In another he holds a folded cloth, possibly symbolic veil of maya.[52]
There are fewer gods, goddesses and observers in this panel than others in this cave, with Brahma, Vishnu, Lakshmi, Saraswati and Parvati are visible and have a facial expression of being spellbound. Also present are his sons leaping Ganesha and Kartikeya holding Shiva's staff, as well as an ascetic and a rishi, thus weaving the family life and the ascetic monastic life, the secular and the spiritual tied in through metaphorical symbolism of dance within the same panel.[52][54] The dancer and destroyer aspects of Shiva are clustered in the northwest part of the cave, in contrast to yoga and creator aspects that are found in the northeast parts.[55] This 6th-century Nataraja shares architectural elements with those found in temples in the western parts of South Asia such as in Gujarat, and in upper Deccan region.[56]
Mount Kailash and Ravananugraha[edit]
Left: Shiva and Parvati on Mount Kailasha. Right: Ravana shaking Mount Kailash.
The carvings at the east entrance are battered and blurry. One in the southeast corner of the mandapa (see 2 on plan) depicts Shiva and Parvati in Mount Kailash in the Himalayas, and the shows the Umamaheshvara story.[41] The scene includes rocky terrain and clouds layered horizontally. On top of the rock sit the four-armed Shiva and Parvati by his side. Nandi stands below her, while celestial apsaras float on the clouds above.[57] There are traces of a crown and a disc behind Shiva, but it is all damaged.[7] The scene is crowded with accessory figures, which may be because the eastern entrance was meant to have a devotional focus.[58]
The panel facing the Mount Kailash panel towards the northeast corner (see 1 on plan) depicts demon king Ravana trying to lift Kailash and bother Shiva, a legend called Ravananugraha.[41][59] The upper scene is Mount Kailash, where Shiva and Parvati are seated. Shiva is recognisable with a crown, and other characters are badly damaged. A portion of ascetic skeletal devotee Bhringi relief survives and he is seated near Shiva's feet. Near Shiva an outline of what may have been Ganesha and Kartikeya are visible. Below the mountain surface is shown the demon-king Ravana is seen with a few arms, trying to unsuccessfully shake Shiva and Parvati in Mount Kailash. The rest of the details are blurry and speculative.[57][59] According to Charles Collins, the discernible elements of this panel are generally consistent with those in medieval era Puranas, though there is a lack in literal correspondence with any single text.[60]
Linga shrine[edit]
Shiva Linga shrine inside the cave complex.
The central shrine of the Great Cave temple is a free-standing square stone cella, with entrances on each of its sides.[61] Each door is flanked by two dvarapalas (gate guardians), for a total of eight around the shrine.[61] The height of the eight dvarapalas is about 4.6 m (15 ft).[62] All are in a damaged condition except those at the southern door to the shrine. The Shaiva guardians carry weapons and flank the doors.[61]
Six steps lead to the inside of the cella from the floor level. In the centre is the mulavigraha Linga, is set on a raised platform above the floor of the shrine by 1.8 m (5 ft 11 in). It is the abstract unmanifest symbol of Shiva in union with the Yoni, and the symbol of Parvati together symbolising the creative source and the regenerative nature of existence.[61] The temple and all the pillars are laid out to lead the pilgrim's view towards it, the cella is visible from any point inside the cave and its most significant progression.[63]
East wing: Shaktism[edit]
The smaller east shrine.
On the east side of the main hall is a separate shrine. It is a 17 m (56 ft)-wide courtyard with a circular pedestal. It once had a seated Nandi facing the Linga shrine, but its ruins have not been restored. To the south side of this eastern courtyard is the Shaktism shrine, with a lion, each seated with a raised forepaw as guardian. Inside the west face of this small shrine (see 10–12 of plan) are Sapta Matrikas, or the "seven mothers" along with Parvati, Kartikeya (Skanda) and Ganesha.[41] The smaller shrine's sanctum features a linga and has a circumambulatory path around it. The sanctum door has Shaiva dvarapalas.[41]
The Shakti panel in the east shrine is unusual in that counting Parvati, it features eight mothers (Asta matrikas) in an era when Sapta matrikas were more common such as at Samalaji and Jogeshwari caves.[64] Additionally, the mothers are flanked on one side with Ganesha and the other with Skanda (Kartikeya) when typical artwork from mid 1st millennium show the Shakta mothers with Ganesha and Shiva.[64][65] According to Sara L. Schastok, the Skanda in the east shrine of Elephanta Cave 1 is significant, just like the one found in Deogarh Hindu temple site, because he is depicted with regalia, weapons and icons similar to Shiva and because he is surrounded by gods and goddesses. By portraying Skanda with Matrikas, he is equated with the Krittikas legend and thereby Kartikeya, and by showing him so prominently centred the artists are likely communicating the unity of Skanda-Shiva, that all these divinities are in essence the same spiritual concept, "all emanations of the lingam at the very heart of Elephanta", according to Schastok.[64]
West wing: Other traditions[edit]
On the west side of the main hall is another attached shrine, though in a much more ruined state. The larger cave on the south side of the west shrine is closed, contains ruins and is bigger than the eastern side shrine. Some of the artworks from here were moved to museums and private collections by mid 19th century, including those related to Brahma, Vishnu and others. The western face has two panels, one showing another version of Shiva in Yoga (see 14 on plan) and another Nataraja (see 15 on plan). Between these is a sanctum with a Shiva Linga.[41][66]
This Yogi Shiva panel is damaged, but unlike the other Yogi depiction, here the leg position in Yoga asana has survived. The Yogishvara is seated on a lotus, and near him are two badly defaced characters, possibly one of Parvati and another ascetic. Above him are ruin remains of celestial gods or goddesses or apsaras. The Yogi Shiva is wearing a crown, and once again there is a space of isolation around the meditating yogi in which no other character enters. Below him, under the lotus, are Nagas and several badly damaged figures two of whom depict the anjali mudra.[67] The Nataraja shown in the west shrine is similar in style to one inside the main mandapa. However, states Collins, its depth of carving appears inferior and it seems more eroded being more open to rains and water damage.[68]
Caves 2-5: Canon hill[edit]
Cave 3 (left) and Cave 4 (right). The caves are smaller, the works of art inside mostly damaged. 3D Tour.
To the south-east of the Great Cave is Cave 2. The cave is unfinished. The front of this cave was completely destroyed and restored in the 1970s with four square pillars. It has two small cells in the back.[69]
Cave 3 is next to Cave 2, as one continues to go away from the main shrine. It is a portico with six pillars, and a mandapa with pillars. The portico is 26 m (85 ft) long and 11 m (36 ft) deep and is supported by four reconstructed pillars.[69] At the back of the portico are three chambers. The central door at the back of the portico leads to a damaged shrine, the sanctum seems to be for a Linga, but that is lost. The shrine is a plain room 6 m (20 ft) deep by 5.7 m (19 ft) wide with a low altar. The shrine door has some traces of sculpture. The dvarapalas on each side, leaning on dwarfs with flying figures over the head, are now in fragments.[70] There are two other chambers, one on each side of the shrine.[69]
Cave 4 is quite damaged, the large verandah lacking all its columns. The relief remains suggest the cave was once a Shaiva temple as well. The shrine in the back contains a lingam. There are also three cells for monks and a chapel at each end of the verandah.[69]
Cave 5 is unfinished and in a very damaged state, with no artistic remains.[70][71]
Stupa hill: caves 6-7, stupas 1-2[edit]
Location map of Elephanta's Stupa Hill with its Buddhist monuments: caves 6 and 7, stupas 1 and 2. Photograph of Cave 6, and plan of the cave.
Across the ravine from Cave 1 on the hill on the other side are two Buddhist caves, together with the remains of a stupa and water tanks.[8] It seems the Buddhists were the first occupants of the island.[72][23]
One is a large hall known as Cave 6, or Sitabai's temple cave (18.963835°N 72.934125°E). The portico has four pillars and two pilasters. The hall has 3 chambers at the back, the central one a shrine and the rest for monks or priests. The hall is devoid of any decoration, except for the door of the central shrine, which has pilasters and a frieze, with the threshold decorated with lion figures.[73] The sanctum has no remaining image. Cave 6 is historically significant because it was converted and used as a Christian church by the Portuguese in the later years when the island was a part of their colony (at some point between 1534 and 1682).[74][75]
Next, along the face of the eastern hill to the north of Sitabai's cave is Cave 7 (18.965100°N 72.934766°E), another small excavation with a veranda, which was probably to be three cells, but was abandoned following the discovery of a flaw in the rock.
Past Cave 7, to the east, is a dry pond, with large artificial boulders and several Buddhist cisterns along its banks. Near the cistern, now at the end of the north spur of the hill, is a mound that was identified as the remains of a Buddhist stupa (18.966026°N 72.936753°E). This stupa, state Michell and Dhavalikar, was originally much taller and dates to about the 2nd century BCE.[76][77]
Lost monuments[edit]
An Elephanta artwork depicting Sadashiva now at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya, Mumbai.
Many artworks from the Elephanta Caves ruins are now held in major museums around India. These include an almost completely destroyed Durga statue with only the buffalo demon with Durga's legs and some waist surviving. Other scholarly studied museum held Elephanta sculpture includes a part of Brahma head, several ruins of Vishnu from different statues, a range of panels and free-standing stone carvings.[78][79] According to Schastok, some of these are "surely not part of the Great Cave", but it is unclear where they were found when they were moved elsewhere, or when ruins were cleared and restoration process initiated.[80]
The significant statues of Vishnu are difficult to explain and to position inside other surviving caves. One theory states that some of the caves must have represented the Vaishnavism tradition. Another theory by some scholars, such as Moti Chandra, suggests that the island once had open-air structural Hindu temples in addition to the caves, but these were the first victims of art destruction.[80]
The Vishnu sculptures found among the Elephanta ruins express different styles. One wears a dhoti and has a looped girdle, while holding a conch at an angle near his thigh. The remnants of his sides suggest that this was likely a four arm iconography.[80] Another statue has elements of Shiva and Vishnu. It was identified to be Shiva by Pramod Chandra, as Kartikeya by Moti Chandra, and as Vishnu by others. It shows a chain link near the thigh, has a gada (mace) on side, and someone standing next to him with a damaged upper portion but with a small waist and full breasts suggestive of a Devi. This statue too is wearing a dhoti.[80]
The island also had a stone horse according to 18th century records, just like the stone elephant that made colonial Portuguese call it "Ilha Elefante". However, this horse was removed to an unknown location before 1764.[81]
History[edit]
The ancient history of the island is unknown in both Hindu or Buddhist records. Archeological studies have uncovered many remains that suggest the small island had a rich cultural past, with evidence of human settlement by possibly the 2nd century BC.[10][2] The Elephanta site was first occupied by Hinayana Buddhists, before the arrival of the Brahmans to the island, to raise a large stupa to the Buddha with seven smaller stupas around it, probably around the 2nd century BCE.[82][5] Coins of the Kshatrapas (Western Satraps) dating to the 4th century CE were found on the island.[83] The regional history is first recorded in the Gupta Empire era, but these do not explicitly mention these caves.[2] This has made the origins and the century in which Elephanta caves were built a subject of a historic dispute. They have been variously dated, mostly between from late 5th to late 8th century AD, largely based on the dating of other cave temples in the Deccan region.[2] Colonial era historians suggested that the caves were built by the Rashtrakutas in 7th century or after, a hypothesis primarily based on some similarities with the Ellora Caves,[2] but this theory has been discredited by later findings.[3][16]
Map of the Early Kalachuris circa 600 CE.[84]
According to Archaeological Survey of India and UNESCO, the site was settled in ancient times and the cave temples were built between 5th and 6th century.[10][2] Contemporary scholars generally place the completion of the temples to the second quarter of the 6th century and as a continuation of the period of artistic flowering in the Gupta Empire era.[16][2][15] These scholars attribute these Cave temples to king Krishnaraja of the Kalachuri dynasty.[3][12] The dating to a mid 6th century completion and it being a predominantly Shiva monument built by a Hindu Kalachuri king is based on numismatic evidence, inscriptions, construction style and better dating of other Deccan cave temples including the Ajanta Caves, and the more firm dating of Dandin's Dasakumaracarita.[16][85][86]
According to Charles Collins, the significance of the Elephanta Caves is better understood by studying them in the context of ancient and early medieval Hindu literature, as well as in the context of other Buddhist, Hindu and Jain cave temples on the subcontinent. The historic Elephanta artwork was inspired by the mythology, concepts and spiritual ideas found in the Vedic texts on Rudra and later Shiva, the epics, the Puranas and the Pashupata Shaivism literature corpus of Hinduism composed by the 5th-century. The panels reflect the ideas and stories widely accepted and well known to the artists and cave architects of India by about 525 CE. The mythology varies significantly in these texts and has been much distorted by later interpolations, but the Elephanta Cave panels represent the narrative version most significant in the 6th century.[87][88] The panels and artwork express through their eclecticism, flux and motion the influence of Vedic and post-Vedic religious thought on Hindu culture in mid 1st millennium CE.[89]
After the caves' completion in the 6th century, Elephanta became popular regionally as Gharapuri (village of caves). The name is still used in the local Marathi language.[90] It became a part of the Gujarat Sultanate rulers, who ceded it to the Portuguese merchants in 1534. The Portuguese named the island "Elephanta Island" for the huge rock-cut stone statue of an elephant, the spot they used for docking their boats and as a landmark to distinguish it from other islands near Mumbai. The elephant statue was damaged in attempts to relocate it to England, was moved to the Victoria Gardens in 1864, was reassembled in 1914 by Cadell and Hewett, and now sits in the Jijamata Udyaan in Mumbai.[4][62][91]
The stone elephant that gave the name Elephanta. It used to be on the south shore of the island, the British attempted to move it to England in 1864, it broke, the reassembled pieces are now at the Jijamata Udyaan.
Scholars are divided on who most defaced and damaged the Elephanta Caves. According to Macneil, the monuments and caves were already desecrated during the Sultanate rule, basing his findings on the Persian inscription on a door the leads to the grand cave.[90] In contrast, others such as Ovington and Pyke, link the greater damage to be from the Christian Portuguese soldiers and their texts which state they used the caves and statues as a firing range and for target practice.[90][92][93]
Macneil concurs that Elephanta Caves were defaced and damaged during the colonial period, but assigns the responsibility not to the soldiers but to the Portuguese authorities.[90] The colonial era British publications state they were "defaced by the zeal of Mahommedans and Portuguese".[4]
The Portuguese ceded the island in 1661 to the colonial British, but by then the Caves had seen considerable damage. The Portuguese had also removed and then lost an inscription stone from the caves.[94][95] During the British rule, many Europeans visited the caves during their visit to Bombay, then published their impressions and memoirs. Some criticised it as having "nothing of beauty or art", while some called it "enormous artwork, of extraordinary genius".[93]
The British relied on the port city of Bombay (now Mumbai), which led to it becoming a major urban centre and the migration of Hindus looking for economic opportunities. The Elephanta caves re-emerged as a centre of Hindu worship, and according to British administration records, the government charged the pilgrims a temple tax at least since 1872.[citation needed]
In 1903, the Hindus petitioned the government to waive this fee, which the British agreed to on three Shiva festival days if Hindus agreed. The Elephants Caves were, otherwise, left in its ruinous condition.[96]
A sketch and a photo of the Elephanta Caves in 19th century.[97]
Samuel Bourne, "Figures on the Linga Chapel. Elephanta," 1863-1869, photograph mounted on cardboard sheet, Department of Image Collections, National Gallery of Art Library, Washington, DC
In the late 1970s, the Government of India restored the main cave in its attempt to make it a tourist and heritage site. The caves were designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987 as per the cultural criteria of UNESCO: the caves "represent a masterpiece of human creative genius" and "bear a unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition or to a civilisation which is living or which has disappeared."[10]
Preservation[edit]
Tourists taking pictures of the Trimurti
The convenient location of these caves near Mumbai (in comparison to other sites that are less well served by Indian travel infrastructure) and Western curiosity for historic Indian culture made Elephanta Caves a subject of numerous guide books and significant scholarly interest in the 20th century. The early speculations and misconceptions about these caves led to many interpretations and scholarly disagreements but also increased the support for their preservation. The publication of their condition, sketches and interpretation by James Burgess in 1871 brought wider attention.[17] The earliest efforts to preserve the Elephanta Caves were taken by British India officials in 1909 when the site was placed under the Indian Archaeological Department and the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act included it within its scope. This helped isolate the island and preserve the ruins.[17]
More specific legislation to preserve the Elephanta Island monuments were enacted with the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act of 1958 and Rules (1959); The Elephanta Island (Protected Monument) Rules of 1957, which prohibits mining, quarrying, blasting, excavation and other operations near the monument; the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act promulgated in 1972 with its Rules promulgated in 1973; a Notification issued in 1985 declaring the entire island and a 1-kilometre (0.62 mi) area from the shore as "a prohibited area"; a series of Maharashtra State Government environmental acts protecting the site; the 1966 Regional and Town Planning Act; and the 1995 Heritage Regulations for Greater Bombay.[20] However, it was in the 1970s that the site received active conservation and restoration efforts. These efforts put back the ruins of Cave 1 and select parts of broken pillars in other caves, along with developing the island as a heritage site.[6][7]
A tourist toy train from dock to the Elephanta Caves; a typical boat that runs between Gateway of India and Elephanta Island.
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Aurangabad Circle maintains and manages the Elephanta Caves. It is responsible for monitoring and stabilisation of the rock face, construction of supports to the cave structures where pillars have collapsed, and consolidation of cave floors and construction of a parapet wall surrounding the site. In addition, it maintains the visitor facilities and an on-site museum. The site receives approximately 1,000 visitors a day, more on Shiva ratri, dance festivals, the World Heritage Day (18 April) and World Heritage Week between 19 and 25 November for special events.[20]
After declaring the caves a World Heritage Site, UNESCO and the ASI have worked together to monitor the site and implement conservation methods on a routine basis.[20]
In literature[edit]
In her 1834 poetical illustration The Caves of Elephanta, to an engraving of a painting by W. Purser, Letitia Elizabeth Landon laments the loss of the original spiritual purpose of this vast structure, so that now: 'The mighty shrine, undeified, speaks force, and only force, Man's meanest attribute'.[98]
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
The Caves of Elephanta,
a poetical illustration
by L. E. L.
The Elephanta Caves are mentioned more than once in Herman Melville's Moby Dick,[99] and also feature in Somerset Maugham's 1944 novel The Razor's Edge.[100]

EsselWorld

EsselWorld
Show map of Mumbai
Show map of Maharashtra
Show map of India
Show all
Coordinates
Status Defunct
Operating season Year-round
EsselWorld is an amusement park located in Gorai on Dharavi island, Mumbai.[1] It is operated Pan India Pariyatan Ltd.[citation needed] It covers an area of 65 acres along with Water Kingdom, and was opened to the public in 1989.[2][3] Along with Adlabs Imagica, EsselWorld is one of the largest amusement parks in India.[4] The park has been temporarily closed until further notice since April 2022.[5]
EsselWorld has been involved in multiple controversies. The original land acquisition for 700 acres was mired in controversy and claimed to be illegal.[6] Additionally, there have been allegations of illegal destruction of mangroves and violation of coastal zone regulations.[7]
The park's catchphrase is "EsselWorld me rahunga mein, ghar nahi jaunga mein ", which means "I will stay in EsselWorld, and do not want to go home".

Not to be confused with the India Gate, the World War I war memorial in New Delhi.
For the 1957 film, see Gateway of India (film).
Gateway of India
The Gateway of India
Location of Gateway of India in Mumbai
Show map of Mumbai
Show map of Maharashtra
Show map of India
Show all
General information
Type Triumphal arch
Architectural style Indo-Islamic architecture of Gujarat[A]
Location Mumbai, India
Coordinates 18.9219°N 72.8346°E
Construction started 31 March 1913
Completed 1924
Inaugurated 4 December 1924
Cost ₹21.13 lakhs
Owner Archaeological Survey of India
Height 26 m (85 ft)
Dimensions
Diameter 15 metres (49 feet)
Design and construction
Architect(s) George Wittet
Architecture firm Gammon India
Renovating team
Architect(s) George Wittet
Website
gatewayofindia.org
The Gateway of India is an arch-monument completed in 1924 on the waterfront of Mumbai (Bombay), India. It was erected to commemorate the landing of George V for his coronation as the Emperor of India in December 1911 at Strand Road near Wellington Fountain. He was the first British monarch to visit India.
The foundation stone was laid in March 1913 for a monument built in the Indo-Islamic style, inspired by elements of 16th-century Gujarati architecture. The final design of the monument by architect George Wittet was sanctioned only in 1914, and construction was completed in 1924. The structure is a memorial arch made of basalt, which is 26 metres (85 feet) high, with an architectural resemblance to a triumphial arch as well as Gujarati architecture of the time.
After its construction, the Gateway was used as a symbolic ceremonial entrance to India for important government personnel. The Gateway is also the monument from where the last British troops in the Army of India left in 1948, following British withdrawal from India a year earlier. It is located on the waterfront at an angle, opposite the Taj Mahal Palace and Tower Hotel and overlooks the Arabian Sea. Today, the monument is synonymous with the city of Mumbai, and is amongst its prime tourist attractions. The gateway is also a gathering spot for locals, street vendors, and photographers soliciting services. It holds significance for the local Jewish community as it has been the spot for Hanukkah celebrations, with the lighting of the menorah, since 2003. There are five jetties located at the Gateway, of which two are used for commercial ferry operations.
The Gateway was the site of a terror attack in August 2003, when there was a bomb blast in a taxi parked in front of it. Access to the gateway was restricted after people congregated at its premises following the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, in which the Taj Hotel opposite the gateway and other locations in its vicinity were targeted.
In March 2019, the Maharashtra state government proposed a four-step plan to develop the location for the convenience of tourists, following a direction issued by the state governor in February 2019.
History and significance[edit]
The Gateway, in 1911
Departure of the last British troops from the Gateway, in 1948
The Gateway of India is located in Mumbai. It is built on 2 December 1911. It was completed in 1920. The Gateway of India was built to commemorate the arrival of George V, Emperor of India and Mary of Teck, Empress consort, in India at Apollo Bunder, Mumbai (Bombay) on 2 December 1911 prior to the Delhi Durbar of 1911; it was the first visit of a British monarch to India.[2][3][4] However, they only got to see a cardboard model of the monument,[B] as construction did not begin until 1915.[2][6]
The foundation stone for the Gateway was laid on 31 March 1913 by then Governor of Bombay, Sir George Sydenham Clarke with the final design of George Wittet for the Gateway sanctioned in August 1914.[7][6] Before the Gateway's construction, Apollo Bunder used to serve a native fishing ground.[8] Between 1915 and 1919 work continued at the Apollo Bunder to reclaim the land on which the Gateway was to be built, along with the construction of a sea wall.[7] Gammon India had undertaken construction work for the gateway.[9][C]
Its foundations were completed in 1920 while construction was finished in 1924.[12][7] The Gateway was opened to the public on 4 December 1924 by then Viceroy, Rufus Isaacs, 1st Marquess of Reading.[13] Following Indian independence, the last British troops to leave India, the First Battalion of the Somerset Light Infantry, passed through the Gateway with a 21-gun salute, as part of a ceremony on 28 February 1948, signalling the end of the British Raj.[14][15][D]
N. Kamala, professor at Jawaharlal Nehru University,[16] refers to the Gateway as a "jewel in the crown" and a "symbol of conquest and colonisation".[17][E] The monument commemorates the legacy of British colonial rule, namely the first visit of a British monarch to India and its use as an entry point for prominent colonial personnel into British India.[20] Today the Gateway is synonymous with the city of Mumbai.[21][22][F] Since its construction, the gateway has remained amongst the first structures visible to visitors arriving in Bombay by the sea.[25][H]
Since 2003, the Gateway has been the location for the local Jewish community to light the menorah for Hanukkah celebrations every year.[28][29] This ritual was started by Rabbi Gavriel Noach Holtzberg of the chabad in Mumbai (located in Nariman House).[28] It also became a site for prayers following the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks which targeted, amongst others, Nariman House.[30] Rabbi Holtzberg lost his life in the 2008 terror attacks.[28]
Design and architecture[edit]
Inscription on the Gateway reading: "Erected to commemorate the landing in India of their Imperial Majesties King George V and Queen Mary on the Second of December MCMXI"
The structure, in yellow basalt and concrete, is rectangular, with two long sides and two much shorter ones. Three arched passageways run between the long sides, as well as a single arched passageway between the two shorter sides. The central arch is higher and wider, with an extra storey above, from which four turrets rise. The arches on the short sides are the same size and design as the smaller arches on the long sides. The style of the Gateway of India is Indo-Saracenic architecture, with many details taken from the Gujarati regional style. The facade is reminiscent of Gujarati mosque facades, for example the Jama Mosque, Ahmedabad of 1424, while the basic shape is, in the terminology of classical architecture, an octopylon with a floor plan of eight piers, as used in some triumphal arches and memorials, including the Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel in Paris. The exterior features restrained but intricate bands of ornament, and jali screens around the smaller arches.
The sea-facing side
The Gateway's arch has a height of 26 metres (85 feet) with its central dome being 15 metres (49 feet) in diameter.[31][9] The monument is built of yellow basalt and reinforced concrete.[32] The stones were sourced locally while the perforated screens were brought in from Gwalior.[33] The monument faces towards the Mumbai Harbour.[34] There are four turrets on the structure of the gateway, and there are steps constructed behind the arch of the Gateway which lead to the Arabian Sea.[35] The monument features intricate stone latticework (also known as the jali work).[31] The Scottish architect, George Wittet combined indigenous architectural elements with elements of 16th-century architecture of Gujarat.[36][I] The harbour front was realigned in order to make an esplanade, which would sweep down to the centre of the town. On each side of the arch, there are large halls with the capacity to hold 600 people.[32] The cost of the construction was ₹21 lakh (US$26,000), borne by the then government.[9] Due to a paucity of funds, the approach road was never built. Hence, the Gateway stands at an angle to the road leading up to it.[13]
Side view, from a boat
In February 2019, Seagate Technology and CyArk embarked on a mission to digitally record and preserve the Gateway, by digital scanning and archiving of the monument.[21] The images and data collected will be used to make photo-real three dimensional models.[37] This is a part of CyArk's international programme for digitally preserving heritage monuments.[21] It involves aerial surveys conducted with terrestrial laser scanning (LiDAR), drones, and photogrammetry exercises.[38] The drawings and three-dimensional models will inform any future reconstruction works.[39]
Location and jetties[edit]
Aerial view in 2014, with the gardens before reduction
Statue of Shivaji, in the vicinity of the Gateway
The Gateway stands at an angle, opposite to the Taj Mahal Palace and Tower Hotel, which was built in 1903.[40] In the grounds of the gateway, opposite the monument, stands the statue of Shivaji, the Maratha warrior-hero who fought against the Mughal Empire to establish the Maratha Empire in the 17th century.[41][42] The statue was unveiled on 26 January 1961 on the occasion of India's Republic Day.[43][44] It replaced a bronze statue of King-Emperor George V which stood at its place.[45][46][J] In 2016, Mid-Day reported that the George V statue is kept locked in a tin shed belonging to the Public Works Department, behind Elphinstone College, in Fort, Mumbai.[48] The George V statue was sculpted by G. K. Mhatre,[49][50] who has over 300 sculptures to his credit in India.[48] Sandeep Dahisarkar, a historian, researcher, and academician, have made efforts to relocate the George V statue to a museum, the latter of whom has reasserted the statue as swadeshi art.[48]
View of Gateway of India from the plaza.
(view as a 360° interactive panorama)
The other statue in the locality of the gateway is that of Swami Vivekananda,[51][52] an Indian monk who is credited as a key figure in the introduction of Indian philosophies such as Vedanta and Yoga to the west, and with bringing Hinduism to the status of a major world religion during the late 19th century.[53][K]
There are five jetties located around the monument.[56] The first jetty is exclusive to the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, while the second and third are used for commercial ferry operations, the fourth one is closed, and the fifth is exclusive to the Royal Bombay Yacht Club.[57] The second and third jetties are the starting point for tourists to reach the Elephanta Caves, which are fifty minutes away by boat from the monument.[40][58] Other routes from the gateway include ferry rides to Rewas, Mandwa, and Alibaug, while cruises also operate from the gateway.[59] These ferries reportedly carry an overload of daily passengers.[60] The Mumbai Port Trust licenses vessels to use the gateway while the Maharashtra Maritime Board issues fitness certificates to them.[61]
Tourism and development[edit]
Gateway of India. Taj Mahal Hotel and Mumbai skyline from Elephanta Island ferry
The Gateway is amongst the prime tourist attractions in Mumbai.[62] The Gateway is a protected monument in Maharashtra under the aegis of the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).[63] It is a regular gathering place for locals, street vendors, and photographers.[34][15][L] In 2012, the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation moved the Elephanta Festival of Music and Dance from its original location at Elephanta Caves — where it had been celebrated for 23 years — to the Gateway, due to the increased capacity offered by the venue.[64] The Gateway can host 2,000 to 2,500 people, whereas Elephanta Caves could host only 700 to 800.[65]
By 2012, the Bombay Municipal Corporation increased the plaza area around the Gateway for pedestrians by restoring the area at a cost of ₹5 crores.[66] It involved the cutting down of trees, reducing the garden area, replacing toilets, and closing the car park. The redevelopment led to a dispute between the Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) and the Urban Design Research Institute, and the government was criticised for poor project implementation which critics alleged had failed to conform to the original plans.[66]
In January 2014, Philips Lighting India, in association with the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation, undertook the expenditure of ₹2 crores to illuminate the gateway, by installing an LED lighting system with sixteen million shades.[67] Philips used products from its Philips Color Kinetics and LED street lighting, and did not receive any branding for the illumination project in which 132 light points were created, which were reportedly sixty-percent more energy efficient than the old lighting system.[67] In August 2014, the state Directorate of Archaeology and Museums had proposed conservation of the Gateway by the ASI, after noting deterioration caused by saline deposits from the sea.[68] An estimate of costs was to be prepared and approved by the ASI. The last such conservation had been undertaken twenty years earlier.[68] An independent study had earlier been conducted at the Gateway, between June 2001 and May 2002, aimed at informing future conservation of the monument understanding the degree of colour changes of stones owing to seasonal weather conditions and saturated colour of minerals.[69] The study found the stones of the monument to appear darker during monsoon than during other seasons while the colour change in the inner portions of the monument rises with variations of seasonal humidity and temperature, given they do not face the sea, rainwater, or sunlight.[70] It concluded with the finding that the alteration degree and overall colour change in the inner portions are higher than those in the outer portions of the monument.[71]
In 2015, the Maharashtra Maritime Board and the Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority approved a proposal to construct a passenger jetty near Apollo Bunder and a promenade between the Gateway and the Bombay Presidency Radio Club.[22] The project was aimed at reducing crowding at the Gateway by closing all its jetties and refocusing the location solely as a tourist attraction.[72]
The Gateway has interested companies and corporate houses such as the Tata Group, the RPG Group, and the JSW Group, who have expressed their wish to maintain the Gateway and enhance its facilities.[73] This happened after the state government identified 371 heritage sites under its Maharashtra Vaibhav State Protected Monuments Adoption Scheme (MVSPMAS).[74] Under this scheme, companies and corporates can adopt heritage monuments and give out funds for their maintenance, to satisfy their corporate social responsibility.[73] The scheme also provides sponsors with the opportunity to generate revenue by selling their rights to feature the heritage monuments in commercials and advertisements. Other revenue-generating opportunities include the sale of entry tickets to the site and charging for the use of facilities.[73]
In February 2019, the Maharashtra state government initiated a plan to restore, clean, and beautify the monument. A project plan was to be prepared in a month.[75] The state governor, C. Vidyasagar Rao, directed the Bombay Municipal Corporation commissioner and architects to submit a project plan in a month on measures to be taken for the purpose.[76][77] In the same month, chemical conservation was proposed by the state archaeology department noting blackening of and algae on stones and surface cracks. Structural stability audit had last been conducted eight years earlier with plant growth on the monument removed annually.[78] In March 2019 the state government agreed on a four-stage plan to manage tourists visiting the site. This involved the physical conservation of the monument, the installation of a sound-and-light show, the relocation of the anchorage around the monument and a streamlined, ticketed entry system.[79] The plan followed UNESCO guidance for protected heritage sites and took into account the views of interested parties, including the Directorate of Museums and Archaeology, which has the monument within its purview; the Mumbai Port Trust, which is entrusted with the land; and the Bombay Municipal Corporation, which controls the location. The task of coming up with a suitable management plan was delegated to architects.[80]
Events and incidents[edit]
Solidarity march at the Gateway, in the aftermath of the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks
The Gateway was the location of a terror attack on 25 August 2003, when there was a bomb blast in front of it.[81] The force of the explosion, from a bomb in a taxi parked near the Taj Mahal Hotel, reportedly threw bystanders into the sea.[82] On 13 August 2005, a mentally unstable man stabbed two young girls from Manipur at the gateway premises.[83] On New Year's Eve, 2007 a woman was groped by a mob at the gateway.[84]
Following the November 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, which targeted the Taj Mahal Palace and Tower Hotel opposite to the Gateway, among other locations, crowds of people including news television reporters and cameramen congregated at the Gateway premises.[81][85] Subsequently, public access to the area around was restricted.[66] Fearing further attacks on the Gateway and on the Elephanta caves, the state government proposed the closure of all of the jetties at the Gateway and their replacement with two new piers, to be built near the Bombay Presidency Radio Club.[59] In response to the terror attacks, a solidarity march was held at the Gateway premises on 3 December 2008.[86][87]
In February 2019, protests were organised at the premises in the wake of the Pulwama attack.[88] In January 2020, the Gateway became a site of spontaneous protests that commenced overnight, under the name of "Occupy Gateway", in the aftermath of the attack on Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi.[89] Protestors were later relocated from the Gateway premises to Azad Maidan in Mumbai to ease the movement of traffic and people.[90][91]
In the media[edit]
The Mumbai-based video game Mumbai Gullies is expected to feature the Gateway of India in its fictional map.[92][93]
Several films, such as Bhai Bhai (1956), Gateway of India (1957), Shararat (1959), Hum Hindustani (1960), Mr. X in Bombay (1964), Sadhu aur Shaitan (1968), Ansoo aur Muskaan (1970), Andaz (1971),Chhoti si Baat (1976) and Don (1978) have been shot at the Gateway of India.
Gallery[edit]
Apollo Bunder, in 1905, with the location where the Gateway stands today
Pigeons on the Gateway grounds
Jali work on the arches
Floral motifs, as seen on the Gateway
Close-up of a turret
The Gateway, lit up in the evening
Internal view of the dome, with muqarnas designs
Beating the Retreat and Tattoo Ceremony at the Gateway, on Navy Day in 2018
The Gateway, as seen with the Taj Mahal Palace and Tower Hotel
Photographer offering services, in the vicinity
Footnotes[edit]
^ Bandyopadhyay et al. (2008) write, "The Indian government's efforts in this portrayal of the Hindu heritage is nowhere more prominent than the mention of the Gateway of India architecture in Mumbai...it was stressed that though the British rulers designed the Gateway, it was according to the Gujarat (one of the Indian states) style."[1]
^ While Dupée (2008) notes that the king and queen passed through a "temporarily constructed mock cardboard and pastiche structure",[2] de Bruyn et al. (2008) note the same simply as a "fake cardboard structure".[5]
^ Gammon India claims to have done India's first pre-cast reinforced concrete piling for the foundations of the Gateway.[10][11]
^ Morris (2005) writes about the gateway, "This was where the British landed: and this where, in the end, they left. The Gateway of India did not see many ceremonial arrivals after all, during its three decades under British rule, but it formed the background to one historical departure — the last parade with which, in 1947, the British said goodbye to their Indian Empire."[15]
^ Kamala (2000) writes, "Through the Gateway, the imperial traveller could perceive in his mind's eye the vision of a subject-nation, a nation constructed and processed in and for his gaze. As Tejaswini Niranjana points out, one of the professed aims of English education was to give the colonized, "along with the English language, models of national culture" (1992, 107),[18] the stated objectives being to "give a liberal English education to the middle and upper classes, in order that we may furnish them with both the materials and models for the formation of a national literature" (Trevelyan 1838, 175).[19] While various notions of India—indeed, various Indias—may have pre-existed British colonization, this one monolithic nation, India, was constructed only in English translation. The Gateway of India looked outward, welcoming the colonizer, a symbol and facilitator of appropriation, but it also looked inward, bringing a people together (and driving them apart) as they dutifully defined their nation in the curiously perceived neutrality of the English language."[17]
^ The gateway has also been featured in films shot in or with stories based in Mumbai. Ranjani Mazumdar (2010), referring to the 1989 Indian film Parinda, writes, "In a city where the rich and poor live cheek by jowl, where disenchantment is the experience of the majority, Mumbai Noir has become synonymous with urban decay, crime, claustrophobia, and an assortment of characters marked by some sort of death wish...Karan is soon sucked into a vortex of violence in a narrative that consciously uses Mumbai's familiar locations like the Gateway of India, the Babulnath Temple, the fountains and various abandoned factories...Urban space is not just the backdrop but a central character in the film and the use of the Gateway of India to stage a bloody climax paved the way for a new imagination of violence."[23]
There is also a 1957 Indian film titled Gateway of India featuring the monument, starring Madhubala and Om Prakash.[24]
^ Referring to the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel located opposite the gateway, both visible together from the sea.
^ Tindall (1992) writes, "If Bombay is, as some think, an Indian city with a Western façade, then the Gateway and the Taj[G] are this façade in spite of their determinedly oriental opulence."[26] While Dupée (2008) writes, "The city's dramatical imperial arch graced the harbor's approach, lending substance to the characterization that Bombay was the "gateway" or "front door" to the subcontinent, not unlike, according to one author, the Arc de Triomphe's as entryway into the city of Paris...The arch of honey-colored basalt was not completed until 1924, but once erected it became for travellers the city's dominant architectural icon. The Taj Mahal Hotel, situated nearby, also faced the harbour, commanding a stunning view of the sea and, dependent upon the traveller's aesthetic tastes, lending an imposing grandeur to the city's image."[2] Yet Monojit (1997) notes, "Visible from way out at sea, it was the first sight of normality in what was to be an alien land...Today, the Gateway is a favourite promenade spot for thousands of Bomabyites...the Gateway that once symbolised Imperial rule still symbolises the city's closeness to the West, its contact with the outside world."[27]
^ Bandyopadhyay et al. (2008) write, "The Indian government's efforts in this portrayal of the Hindu heritage is nowhere more prominent than the mention of the Gateway of India architecture in Mumbai...it was stressed that though the British rulers designed the Gateway, it was according to the Gujarat (one of the Indian states) style."[1]
^ McGarr (2015) writes, "In July 1959, in Bombay, moves were set in train to replace a statue of George V, which stood next to the Gateway of India on the city's waterfront, with a figure of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, a renowned Maratha warrior. As one of the best-known royal statues in India, the decision elicited strong feelings among those on both sides of the statues debate. One British expatriate living in Bombay, wrote to the editor of The Times of India to decry 'the limits [to] which petty-mindedness and nationalistic feeling can be carried'. Back in London, William Haley, editor of The Times, echoed such sentiment...Haley wrote to a friend, 'this business of removing statues is really rather nonsense. Rather like un-writing history in George Orwell's 1984. What is done is done and there is no reason for the Indians to be ashamed of it...When will man-kind grow up?' Official Indian sentiment, however, had begun to turn decisively against the retention of British statues in public locations. In September 1961, in Maharashtra (a new state carved from the former Bombay Presidency along linguistic lines) a committee established to look into the retention of British monuments reported that none of the state's British statues could be regarded as offensive to Indian nationalism, and extremely few had been defaced. Nonetheless, the committee recommended the progressive replacement of British iconography with that 'more in consonance with the sense of patriotism and nationalism which has developed since the attainment of Independence in 1947'...In Calcutta, municipal authorities announced that statues of Lord Lawrence and Queen Victoria, which stood in prominent positions in the heart of the city, would be replaced by figures of the Indian nationalist icons...Only in New Delhi, it seemed, was a nationwide trend towards the removal of British statuary. The continued presence of British iconography in India's capital was shortly, however, to become a matter of contentious political debate."[47]
^ Bandyopadhyay et al. (2008), referring to the renaming of colonial names of cities and locations, write, "...although the Gateway is associated with colonial heritage, which the Indian government also embraces, it wants to make a point that the Hindus were not short of renowned leaders/personalities (here in the case of two statues, Swami Vivekananda who is arguably India's greatest spiritual celebrity, and Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj who was arguably one of the country's most respected Hindu rulers). This resistance, it can be argued is targeted in opposition to the Western colonial influence which...is a "psychological state resulting from suppressed feelings of envy and hatred."[1]
In 2017, Bharatiya Janata Party member Raj K. Purohit, who has held six terms in the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly, demanded the gateway to be renamed "Bharat Dwaar" (the Hindi translation of "the gateway of India") to ensure an "Indian name" for the monument and to let go of India's "colonial hangover".[54] He further claimed the monument to be a "symbol of slavery".[55]
^ Morris (2005) writes, "Today the Gateway of India has forgotten all its pompous or elegiac meanings and is a place of pleasure, habitually thronged, inside and out, by companionable crowds out for the sea air. The liners no longer come from Londond, and the only boats around the pier are pleasure crafts touting trips around the harbour, or excursions to the Elephanta Caves. It is a merry place, an ice-cream place...".[15]

Juhu
View of Juhu from an aeroplane window
Juhu
Show map of Mumbai
Show map of Maharashtra
Show map of India
Show all
Coordinates: 19.10°N 72.83°E
Country India
State Maharashtra
District Mumbai Suburban
City Mumbai
Government
 • Type Municipal Corporation
 • Body Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (MCGM)
Languages
 • Official Marathi
Time zone UTC+5:30 (IST)
Area code 022
Juhu (Pronunciation: [d͡ʒuɦuː]) is a suburb of Mumbai. It is known for the sprawling Juhu Beach. It is surrounded by the Arabian Sea to the west, Versova to the north, Vile Parle to the east and Santacruz to the south. Juhu is among the most expensive and affluent areas of the metropolitan area and home to many Bollywood celebrities. The nearest railway stations are Santacruz, Andheri and Vile Parle on the Western Line and Harbour Line of the Mumbai Suburban Railway. The nearest metro stations are D. N. Nagar and Andheri West. There are two minor B.E.S.T bus depots in Juhu.
J. R. D. Tata, the father of civil aviation in India, made his maiden voyage to Juhu Airport from Drigh Road airstrip, Karachi, via Ahmedabad, on 15 October 1932 carrying mail in a Puss Moth aircraft.[1][2]
Climate[edit]
Juhu enjoys a uniform climate throughout the year. In summers the maximum temperature reaches 35 °C (95 °F) and the minimum temperature is 25 °C (77 °F). The weather remains hot through winter. Monsoons prevail from mid-June to September, when it rains quite heavily.
History[edit]
In the nineteenth century, Juhu was an island: a long, narrow sand bar rising above sea level by a metre or two, just off the west coast of Salsette. It could be reached during low tides by walking across the tidal inlet.[3]
Juhu was called "Juvem" by the Portuguese. At its north point, nestled the village of Juhu, inhabited by Agris (salt traders) and Kunbis (cultivators) and at its south point, opposite Bandra island, lived a small colony of fisherfolk and cultivators (Koliwada). The inhabitants of Juhu were mainly Koli people and there was a small section of Goans. The Church of St. Joseph was built by the Portuguese in 1853.[4] The open beaches of Juhu have attracted the well-heeled and the most affluent among Mumbai's population for almost a century. In the 1890s, Jamsetji Tata purchased land on Juhu and built a bungalow there. He planned to develop 1,200 acres (4.9 km2) in Juhu Tara. This was to yield 500 plots of one acre (4,000 m2) each and a seaside resort. Simultaneously he wanted to extend the Mahim Causeway to Santacruz, to access to this area. After his death in 1904, the scheme was abandoned. With the dawn of aviation in the 20th century, the Bombay Flying Club commenced operations in 1929 at what eventually became the present Juhu Aerodrome.[5]
During the Indian independence movement, Mahatma Gandhi visited Mumbai and took several walks along Juhu Beach. A famous photograph of Gandhi poking his grandson Kanaa during a walk on the beach was taken in 1937.[6] To mark Gandhi's visit to Juhu, a statue of him was installed by the beach and a lane near the beach was named Gandhigram Road. There is also a school named after him, the Gandhi Shiksha Bhavan school, in Juhu.[7]
In the 1970s, Bhaktivedanta Swami (Srila Prabhupada) started the Hare Krishna Movement and built ISKCON Temple.[citation needed]
Founded in 1928 as India's first civil aviation airport, Juhu aerodrome served as the city's primary airport during and up to World War II. In the 1990s, a group of terror suspects detonated a bomb in a Juhu hotel, as well as in a number of other locations.[8]
Juhu Beach[edit]
Juhu Beach is located on the shores of the Arabian Sea. It stretches for six kilometres up to Versova. The short, rocky formations make up the Juhu Beach unlike the Marina Beach in Chennai that is primarily sandy. It is a tourist attraction throughout the year and is also a destination for shooting films. The beach generally gets more crowded on weekends and public holidays. The food court at its main entrance is known for its 'Mumbai style' street food, notably bhelpuri, pani puri and sev puri. Horse-pulled carriages used to offer joyrides to tourists for a small fee but have been banned now. Acrobats, dancing monkeys, cricket matches, toy sellers,Youth are playing old games vie for tourist's attention. The beach is among the most popular sites in the city for the annual Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations where thousands of devotees arrive in grand processions, carrying idols of the Lord Ganesh of various sizes, to be immersed in the sea at the beach. Juhu Beach is also a common spot for plane spotting as a portion of it lies underneath the departure path from Runway 27 and occasionally, the arrival path from Runway 09 of Mumbai Airport. There are several small entrances to the beach throughout the stretch, however the main and most used entrance is near Hotel Ramada Plaza By Wyndham Palm Grove. The best time to visit Juhu Beach is from September to May, as during the monsoon period of June to August the tide is mostly high which makes it dangerous to wander around on the beach.[citation needed]
Juhu beach sunset panorama view
Home to celebrities[edit]
The busy-yet-peaceful surroundings of Juhu is home to many Bollywood celebrities and a significant number of Mumbai's business elite. Hence, Juhu has come to be referred to as the "Beverly Hills of Bollywood".[9][10]
Juhu Citizen Welfare Group[edit]
The Juhu Citizen Welfare Group is the outcome of many years of activism by Juhu residents who have been associated with other NGOs. It was formed in April 2002 (The Juhu Seatizen) and later formalised in August 2003 with its own monthly publication called The Juhu Citizen.[11] Officially registered in March 2004, it now comprises voluntary members invited from NGOs in the K-West Municipal Ward of North West Mumbai.
Religious places[edit]
ISKCON, Juhu
International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) also known as Hare Krishna Mandir
Mukteshwar Devalay (Gandhigram Road)
Chandra Prabhu Jain Temple
Mahalaxmi Temple
St. Joseph's Church, Juhu
Holy Cross Church, Juhu Koliwada
Vittal Rukmani Temple, Juhu Koliwada
Grand Mosque Juhu (Opposite Juhu Garden)

hide
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. (June 2015)
This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. (June 2015)
KidZania Mumbai is a global indoor theme park, located in R-City Mall, Ghatkopar, Mumbai, India. It is a family entertainment centre for children in the age group of 4 to 16 to enhance their social and cognitive skills.[1] Opened in August 2013, KidZania Mumbai is India's first, and the world's 14th KidZania theme park.[2]
Slogan: "Get ready for a better world."
Type: Family Entertainment Center
Industry: Theme Park
Headquarters: Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Key People: Sanjeev Kumar [CEO], S. Sundaram [CFO], Yazdi Khambatta [Facility Director]
Locations: Mumbai, India/Opening soon in Delhi NCR, India
Website: http://mumbai.kidzania.com
Characters: Urbano, Vita, Bache, Beebop, Chika
Overview[edit]
The Kidzania Mumbai kids park is a real lifestyle theme based games zone for kids aged 4 to 16 years. The park has a real city-like look with real time brand-like buildings and structures. The activities planned in the park engage kids in roleplaying roles and accomplishing tasks related to those roles. The fun and benefit is paid in task accomplishments.
Children can roleplay as a fireman, a radio jockey or a doctor, perform duties and get credits. Unique to KidZania Mumbai, children can also experience local establishments like the Bollywood Acting Academy, The Pottery Studio and the Dabbawalla service (boxed lunch delivery).[3] KidZania gives children the opportunity to play adult roles by allowing them to roleplay, emulate, re-enact and participate in adult activities and experiences.

History[edit]
KidZania was created and developed by Mexican entrepreneur, Xavier López Ancona. The first KidZania opened in September 1999, in Santa Fe Shopping Mall in Mexico City, and was named La Ciudad de los Niños ("The City of the Children").[citation needed] Today, there are 24 KidZania Theme Parks operational around the world with 10 more to be launched by the end of 2020. KidZania has received more than 35 million guests around the world since its opening, making it one of the fastest growing global edutainment brands in the world.[4]
KidZania has been brought to the domestic market by ImagiNation Edutainment India, which is promoted by Bollywood star Shahrukh Khan, with 26 percent stake, and KidZ Inc of Singapore, which holds the remaining 74 percent. KidZ Inc. is co-owned by the Comcraft, Xander & Maxfield Management Ltd. Groups.[5][6][7]
Age eligibility[edit]
Children between 4 and 16 years of age can participate in the role-playing activities at KidZania. However, some activities may have a height and age restriction.
Toddlers (aged between 2 and 4 years) have a separate section with play-areas earmarked for them, called Urbano's House, and can participate in some of the role-playing activities.
Babies (below the age of 2 years) can relax and enjoy in the play-areas at Urbano's House.
Adults and parents can observe their children role-playing in various activities, or spend time in the Pepperfry Parents Lounge. There are some establishments, like the Star TV Studio or the Theatre, where they can witness the activities inside the establishments from the seating area. However, adults are not allowed within the KidZania premises, unless they are accompanying children.
Awards[edit]
KidZania Mumbai has won many awards from various organisations for value, uniqueness and future potential, including:
Best Destination for Kids by 4th World Children Expo[8]
The Best New Concept by Kids by 4th World Children Expo[8]
The Most Admired Retail Concept Launch of the Year by India Retail Forum 2014[9]
Emerging Brand Award by Global Marketing Excellence 2014[10]
Rotary Club of Mumbai Green City Appreciation Award 2014[8]
Indian Development Foundation CSR Award for year 2013-14[8]
Industry partners[edit]
Amity University
Bajaj Electricals
Big Bazaar
Birla Sun Life Insurance
Cadbury Dairy Milk[11]
Central
Club Mahindra
Coca-Cola
DHL
Ezone
Frooti
Furtados School of Music[12]
Godrej Security Solutions
Hardy's
HealthSpring[13]
Hyundai[14]
Kansai Nerolac Paints
Kellogg's Chocos
Kokuyo Camlin
Mad Over Donuts[15]
Nutella
Parachute Advanced
Parle Products
Pepperfry
Radio City
Sbarro
Shiamak Davar International
STAR TV[16]
The Times of India
Toonz Animation
Yes Bank[17]
Zespri

Look for Mani Bhavan Gandhi Museum on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Mani Bhavan Gandhi Museum in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Mani Bhavan Gandhi Museum" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Marine Drive may refer to:
Roads[edit]
Bangladesh[edit]
Cox Bazar-Tekhnaf Marine Drive, world's longest marine drive road.
Canada[edit]
Marine Drive (Nova Scotia), a scenic route in Nova Scotia
Marine Drive (Greater Vancouver), a number of roadways in Metropolitan Vancouver
India[edit]
Marine Drive, Mumbai, a major boulevard in South Mumbai in the city of Mumbai
Marine Drive, Kochi, a promenade in Kochi
United Kingdom[edit]
Marine Drive (Llandudno), a road around the Great Orme headland in Llandudno, Wales
Marine Drive (Scarborough), a section of seafront road in Scarborough, England
United States[edit]
Marine Drive, the former name of Guam Highway 1
Films[edit]
Marine Drive (film), a 1955 Bollywood film directed by G. P. Sippy

Look for Mount Mary Basilica on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Mount Mary Basilica in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Mount Mary Basilica" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Nariman Point
Urban
Air India Building, Trident hotel and Oberoi hotel (L-R) on Marine Drive in Nariman point
Nariman Point
Nariman point in Mumbai
Show map of Mumbai
Show map of Maharashtra
Show all
Coordinates: 18.926°N 72.823°E
Country India
State Maharashtra
District Mumbai City
City Mumbai
Founded by Khurshed Nariman
Named for Khurshed Nariman
Government
 • Type Municipal Corporation
 • Body Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC)
Languages
 • Official Marathi
Time zone UTC+5:30 (IST)
PIN
400021[1]
Area code 022
Vehicle registration MH 01
Civic agency BMC
Nariman Point is a prominent downtown area of Mumbai in Maharashtra, India. Located on the southern tip of the Mumbai peninsula, at the end of the Mumbai's Marine Drive, Nariman Point houses some of India's prestigious business headquarters.
It is bordered by Churchgate in North, Arabian Sea on West and South, by Colaba on East side. It is one of the tourist attractions of Mumbai due to its skyline, Arabian sea view, Marine drive and lots of luxury 5 star hotels, restaurants.
History[edit]
Prior to 1940, the area was part of the Arabian sea. A popular leader of the Congress, Khurshed Nariman (affectionately called Veer Nariman), a Bombay Municipal Corporation corporator, proposed the land reclamation of the area of sea near Churchgate. To accomplish this task, the shallow seafront was filled with debris from various parts of the city. Reinforced concrete cement was also used, the steel for which had to be purchased on the black market at higher prices due to World War II.The entire cost was estimated to be ₹300,000 (equivalent to about ₹158 million in 2024). Additional reclamations were carried out in the 1970s. A construction boom in that decade also led to the development of commercial high-rises in the area.[citation needed]
In 2006, prior to the financial crisis of 2007–08, Nariman point was the seventh most expensive location in the world for office space.[2] However, by December 2012 Nariman Point had fallen to 25th place while Delhi's Connaught Place remained the fifth most expensive location despite many offices moving to Gurgaon and Noida.[2] During the same period, Nariman Point also dropped from seventh to fifteenth most expensive location for office rentals.[3] The reasons for the decline were the high prices, lower quality and age of construction, and increasing distances from residential hubs which have now moved northwards and to the suburbs.[3] In the first three quarters of 2012, Nariman Point had a vacancy rate of almost 25%, compared with 18% in the rest of the Mumbai city.[4]
From left to right, Air India building, Trident hotel, Oberoi hotel and Marine drive road in the Nariman Point
Nariman point buildings at night
Terrorist attacks[edit]
In 1993, the 1993 Bombay bombings took place. Bombs were destroyed at Nariman point and nearby places. There were also bombs in other parts of the city. [5]
On the evening of 26 November 2008, Pakistan trained Lashkar-e-Taiba Islamic terrorists attacked the luxury hotels Trident and Oberoi, located in this area. Both are luxury hotels. The terrorists attacked people with AK-47 assault rifles and Hand Grenades. This was part of the larger Mumbai terrorist attack. 166 people were killed, 238 injured to various degrees, and the Taj Hotel was besieged for 3 days. The Mumbai police apprehended one of the terrorists, Ajmal Kasab. The rest were eliminated in various operations by India's security forces.[6]
Economy[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (July 2016)
Air India had its headquarters in the Air India Building for many years.
Renewable Energy and Power companies Ind Renewable Enercy Ltd and Vakharia Power Infrastructure Ltd are headquartered at Regent Chambers, 208 Nariman Point, Mumbai.[7]
At one time All Nippon Airways maintained its Mumbai sales office in the Oberoi Trident Towers in Nariman Point.[8]
Gallery[edit]
A view of Nariman Point and Colaba in day light
View of Nariman Point in the evening
View of Colaba and Cuffe Parade from Nariman Point

Look for Shree Siddhivinayak on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Shree Siddhivinayak in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Shree Siddhivinayak" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Sri Sri Radha Gopinath Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Sri Sri Radha Gopinath Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Sri Sri Radha Gopinath Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Water Kingdom on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Water Kingdom in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Water Kingdom" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
The Aga Khan Palace
Location Pune, Maharashtra, India
Coordinates 18.5523°N 73.9015°E
Area 7.7 hectares (19 acres)
Built 1892; 132 years ago
Governing body Gandhi National Memorial Society
Location of Aga Khan Palace in Maharashtra
The Aga Khan Palace was built by Sultan Muhammed Shah Aga Khan III in the city of Pune, India.
The palace was an act of charity by the spiritual leader of the Nizari Ismaili Muslims, who wanted to help the poor in the neighbouring areas of Pune, who were drastically hit by famine by offering them work.[1][2] The construction lasted 5 years and involved hundred thousand people. It costed 1.2 million rupees.[3]
The Aga Khan Palace is a majestic building.[4] The palace is closely linked to the Indian freedom movement as it served as a prison for Mahatma Gandhi, his wife Kasturba Gandhi, his secretary Mahadev Desai. Sarojini Naidu and several others were also imprisoned during the Quit India Movement that demanded an end to British rule in India.[3] It is also the place where Kasturba Gandhi and Mahadev Desai died.[4] In 2003, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) declared the site as a monument of national importance.[3][5] Aga Khan Palace is major attraction of photographers for various kind of photo shoot because of its special architecture, greenery and perfect for photography lighting.
History[edit]
Aga Khan Palace, Pune
Statue depicting the Quit India Movement, Aga Khan Palace, Pune
Kasturba Gandhi Samadhi
Historically, the palace holds great significance. Mahatma Gandhi, his wife Kasturba Gandhi and his secretary Mahadev Desai were interned in the palace from 9 August 1942 to 6 May 1944, following the launch of Quit India Movement. Kasturba Gandhi and Mahadev Desai died during their captivity period in the palace and have their Samadhis located over there. Mahatma Gandhi and Kasturba Gandhi have their memorials located in the same complex, near Mula river.[6] Legend goes that the Sultan built the palace to provide employment to the famine struck villagers of the surrounding region; so he employed 1000 people, and the palace was constructed in five years. It was built in Rs 12 lakhs. The total area is 7.7 hectares (19 acres) and built up palace covers 2.8 hectares (6.9 acres), and the rest is a well maintained garden.
The palace housed a residential co-education School from 1953 - 72. In 1969, Aga Khan Palace was donated to the Indian people by Aga Khan IV as a mark of respect to Gandhi and his philosophy.[1][3] Today the palace houses a memorial on Gandhi where his ashes were kept. The then prime minister Indira Gandhi had visited the place in 1974 where she allotted a sum of ₹200,000 (US$2,500) every year, for its maintenance. The amount rose to ₹1 million (US$13,000) until the 1990s,[7] after which the national monument of India, was neglected for many years due to improper allocation of funds. There was a protest held at the statue of Mahatma Gandhi near Pune railway station in July 1999 to protest against the worsening condition of the monument. The present condition has improved quite a lot.[8]
Architecture[edit]
The Aga Khan Palace follows the Indo-Saracenic style of architecture and is complete with pediments and turrets.[3] The area of the ground floor is 1756 m2, that of the first floor is 1080 m2, whereas the second floor has a construction of 445 m2. The speciality of this structure is its corridor of 2.5 meters around the entire building. The palace captivates the eye of a spectator with its magnificence and picturesque architecture.[9]
Museum[edit]
The Gandhi Museum at Aga Khan Palace is spread over six galleries. The galleries exhibit several statues of Gandhi and others. There are several displays complete with charts and diagrams depicting the history of the Quit India Movement.[3]
Complex[edit]
The complex covers an area of 19 acres (77,000 m2), out of which 7 acres (28,000 m2) is the built up area. The palace is also the headquarters of the Gandhi National Memorial Society.[10] It also hosts a shop that deals in khaadi and other hand loomed textiles.[11] There is also a canteen. The complex also houses the samadhis of Kasturba Gandhi and Mahadev Desai. The marble samadhis contain the shes of both and are octagonal in structure. In 1992 a portion of Mahatma Gandhi's ashes were shifted in the complex and a similar (not replica) samadhi built. The three samadhis are enclosed in a walled complex with marble flooring and surrounded by a low wall.[3]
Activities organised at the palace[edit]
Aga Khan Palace as viewed from the left rear side
Gandhi Memorial society celebrates the following public functions at the palace:
Martyr's Day – 30 January.
Mahashivratri – Kasturbha Gandhi's Death Day Celebrated As Mother's Day.
Independence Day – 15 August.
Republic Day – 26 January.
Mahatma Gandhi's Birth Anniversary – 2 October.
Other than yearly events, morning prayer sessions are held daily at the samadhi since decades. The prayer draws huge crowds everyday, and the number goes up threefold on 2 October as people visit the place to pay tribute to Mahatma Gandhi.[12]
Gallery[edit]
A scanned image of Aga Khan Palace before India's independence.
Kasturba Gandhi Memorial Stone (One on the right) with the memorial stone of Mahadev Desai in the palace where she died.
Distance view of the palace.
Gandhi's ashes at the palace.
Front View of Aga Khan Palace
Side View of Aga Khan Palace
Aga Khan Palace Full View
Milestones related to Mahatma Gandhi at Aga Khan Palace
Information Plaque at Aga Khan Palace
Aga Khan Palace Side View
Panoramic view from the palace

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Chaturshringi Temple" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Chaturshringi Temple
Chaturshrungi Temple
श्री चतुर्श्रुंगी देवस्थान
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
Deity Goddess Chaturshringi
Festivals Navratri
Location
Location Senapati Bapat Road, Pune
State Maharashtra
Country India
Location in Maharashtra, India
Geographic coordinates 18°32′20.36″N 73°49′41.60″E
Architecture
Type West Indian
Creator Durlabhsheth Pitambardas Mahajan
Completed During Shivaji's reign
Website
http://www.chattushringidevasthanpune.org
The Chattushringi[1] Temple also spelt as Chattushrungi Temple is a Hindu temple in the city of Pune in Maharashtra state of India.[2] The temple is located on the slope of a hill on Senapati Bapat Road.[3] It is said to have been built during the reign of the Maratha king Shivaji. The temple is looked after by Chattushringi Devasthan (Temple) trustees.
Chattushringi (Chattu means four) is a mountain with four peaks. The Chattushringi temple is 90 feet (27 m) high and 125 feet (38 m) wide and is a symbol of power and faith. One has to climb more than 200 steps to reach the shrine of Goddess Chattushringi. In the temple premises there are also temples of Goddess Durga and Lord Ganesh. This includes eight miniature idols of Ashtavinayaka. These small temples are located on the four separate hillocks.[3]
Legend[edit]
The legend associated with the temple is that, once there was a rich and prosperous merchant named Durlabhsheth Pitambardas Mahajan who was an ardent believer of Goddess Saptashrungi Devi and visited Vani every now and then. But as he grew older, he could no longer travel and this hindered him from visiting the temple and it bought him sorrow in his heart, he prayed Saptashrungi Devi with tears and then one night the Goddess Saptashrungi Devi appeared in his dream and told him, "if you can not come to me, I will come to you & stay near you." She told him to come to a mountain situated in the North-West of Pune & dig there. The place as described by the goddess was traced out and a miracle happened as he found a natural statue of the goddess (swayambhu devi). He constructed the temple at that place and this is the same temple which was renovated from time to time, which is the present temple.[4]
Deity[edit]
The presiding deity of the temple is Goddess Chattushringi, also known as Goddess Ambareshwari. She is also considered as the presiding deity of the city of Pune. The temple is maintained by the Chattushringi Devasthan Trust. Every year a fair is held at the foothills on the eve of Navratri. Thousands of people gather to worship the Goddess Chattushringi.[3]

Dagadusheth Halwai Ganapati Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District Pune district
Deity Ganesha
Governing body Shreemant Dagadusheth Halwai Sarvajanik Ganapati Trust
Location
Location Pune City
State Maharashtra
Country India
Location in Maharashtra
Show map of Maharashtra
Show map of India
Show all
Geographic coordinates 18°30′59″N 73°51′22″E
Website
http://www.dagdushethganpati.com/
The Dagadusheth Halwai Ganapati temple is a Hindu Temple located in Pune and is dedicated to the Hindu god Ganesh. The temple is visited by over hundred thousand pilgrims every year.[1][2] Devotees of the temple include celebrities and chief ministers of Maharashtra who visit during the annual ten-day Ganeshotsav festival.[3] The main Ganesh idol is insured for sum of ₹10 million (US$130,000).[4] It celebrated 130 years of its Ganapati in 2022.[5]
History[edit]
Shrimant Dagadusheth Halwai and his wife Laxmibai was a trader and sweet maker settled in Pune. His original halwai shop still exists under the name "Dagdusheth Halwai Sweets" near Datta Mandir in Pune. Eventually he became a successful sweet seller and a rich businessman. In the later 1800s, they lost their only son in a plague epidemic. They were approached by a compassionate sage who advised them to build a Ganesha temple in Pune.[6]
Later, as they did not have any heir, Dagdusheth adopted his nephew Govindsheth (born 1865) who was 9 years old at the time of their death. Govindsheth was born in 1891 in Pune. He replaced the first Ganesh idol by a new one, with the first one still being present at Akra Maruti Chowk. A kind-hearted and generous man, he established one more Ganesh idol in wrestlers training center, which is called Jagoba Dada Talim. This talim was owned by Dagdusheth as he was also a former wrestling trainer. One of the chowk (area) in Pune is named Govind Halwai Chowk, after him. Along with his mother, Govindsheth handled all the programmes like Ganesh Utsav, Datta Jayanti and other festivities. The residence where they resided is now known as Laxmibai Dagdusheth Halwai Sansthan Datta Mandir Trust. Laxmi Road in Pune is named after Laxmibai Dagdusheth halwai. Govindsheth died in 1943. His son Dattatray Govindsheth Halwai, born in 1926, was the one who established the third Ganesh idol replacing the second. This idol, known as Navasacha Ganpati, is the one that is present today in the Dagdusheth temple. It proved to be an epoch-making event in Indian history.[7]
Temple[edit]
The central icon of Ganesha
The temple is a beautiful construction and boasts a rich history of over 100 years. Jay and Vijay, the two sentinels made of marble catch the eye of all at the outset. The construction is so simple that all the proceedings in the temple along with the beautiful Ganesh idol can be seen even from outside. The Ganesh idol is 2.2 metres tall and 1 metrewide. It is adorned with nearly 40 kilos of gold. Daily pooja, abhisheka and the arti of Ganesh are worth attending. The lighting of the temple during the Ganesh festival is marvelous. Shrimant Dagdusheth Ganpati Trust looks into the maintenance of the temple. The temple is situated in the centre of city, local shopping market is also the nearby temple. Various cultural activities like music concerts, bhajans, and Atharvasheersh recitation are organized by the trust.[8]
Shri Datta Mandir placed in Budhwar Peth, Pune was their residential Building. Dagduseth's grandson govindseth was also famous for his kindness and generosity. In Pune, govind halwai chowk is famous by his name.
He later established the Halwai Ganapati Trust.[1][3] Bal Gangadhar Tilak, during the British Raj, gave a public form to the Ganesh festival celebrations as a way of getting around an order that barred public meetings.[1]
Temple Trust[edit]
The Shrimant Dagadusheth Halwai Ganapati Trust carries out philanthropic work from the donations received, and is one of the richest in Maharashtra.[9] The trust operates an old age home called Pitashree at Kondhwa in Pune. The home was built at a cost of ₹15 million (US$190,000) and opened in May 2003.[10] In the same building the trust provides housing and education for 400 destitute children.[9] Other services provided by the trust include ambulance service for poor and health clinics in tribal belts of Pune District.[11]
Ganesh festival, Gudhi Padwa till Ram Navami are the festivals celebrated by Dagadusheth halwai Ganapati Trust, Pune.[citation needed]
Gallery[edit]
Interior of temple
Statue of Ganesha
Temple during Ganesh Chaturthi
Exterior of temple

Look for Darshan Museum on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Darshan Museum in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Darshan Museum" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for ISKCON NVCC Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for ISKCON NVCC Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "ISKCON NVCC Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Laxmi Road on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Laxmi Road in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Laxmi Road" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Malshej Ghats on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Malshej Ghats in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Malshej Ghats" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Phoenix Marketcity is the name of several shopping malls developed by The Phoenix Mills Co. Ltd. of India, including:
Phoenix Marketcity (Bangalore)
Phoenix Marketcity (Chennai)
Phoenix Marketcity (Mumbai)
Phoenix Marketcity (Pune)
This article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names).
If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.
Look for Pune Okayama Friendship Garden on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Pune Okayama Friendship Garden in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Pune Okayama Friendship Garden" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Raja Dinkar Kelkar Museum
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Established 1920
Location Pune, Maharashtra, India
Collection size 15000 objects
Website rajakelkarmuseum.org
Lamps gallery at the museum
Chess set in the museum
The Raja Dinkar Kelkar Museum is in Pune, Maharashtra, India.[1] It contains the collection of Dr. Dinkar G. Kelkar (1896–1990), dedicated to the memory of his only son, Raja.[2] The three-storey building houses various sculptures dating back to the 14th century.[citation needed] There are also ornaments made of ivory, silver and gold, musical instruments (a particularly fine collection),[3] war weapons and vessels.[2]
History[edit]
The collection was started around 1920, and by 1960 it contained around 15,000 objects. The museum was established in 1962, and Dr. Kelkar donated his collection to the Government of Maharashtra in 1975.[4][5]
The museum now holds over 20,000 objects of which 2,500 are kept on display. These consist of mainly Indian decorative items from everyday life and other art objects, mostly from the 18th and 19th centuries. The museum's collection depicts the skills of the Indian artists of the time, including the prominent works of Pandit Abhijeet Joshi.[6][2]
During the COVID-19 pandemic in India, the museum offered a virtual tour.[7]
Collection[edit]
Door frames
Vessels
Ornaments
Musical instruments
Different paintings and carvings represent outstanding examples of their art
Gallery[edit]
Items on display in the museum include the following.
Arms & Armours
Betel nut crackers
Mastani Peshwa
Lord Krishna and maids helping Sudama with his bath
String puppets of Odisha
Shadow puppets of Karnataka
Pawns of Medieval Chess Board
Wooden Sclepture of Shiv Tandav
Wooden sculpture in 18 th century
Chandrashekhar Agashe Museum Wing[edit]
This wing includes a collection of ancient Indian musical instruments belonging to the late industrialist Chandrashekhar Agashe donated by his sons, Panditrao Agashe and Dnyaneshwar Agashe.[8] Taking his namesake, honoring the kinship of Chandrashekhar Agashe's widow and the founder of the museum, Dr. Dinkar G. Kelkar, with them being fourth cousins.[9][10]

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
18.4529061°N 73.8611752°E
Location Katraj, Pune
Land area 130 acres (53 ha)[1]
No. of animals 362[1]
Memberships CZA[2]
Website www.pmc.gov.in/en/zoo
The Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park, commonly known as the Rajiv Gandhi Zoo or Katraj Zoo,[3] is located in Katraj, Pune district, Maharashtra State, India. It is managed by the Pune Municipal Corporation. The 130-acre (53 ha) zoo is divided into three parts: an animal orphanage, a snake park, and a zoo, and includes the 42-acre (17 ha) Katraj Lake.
History[edit]
White Tiger
Peacock
In 1953 the Pune Municipal Corporation created Peshwe Park on about 7 acres (2.8 ha) where Madhavrao Peshwe had established a private menagerie in 1770. Located in the heart of the city at the base of Parvati Hill, this zoo exhibited animals in traditional cages.[1]
In 2004, Mr. Neelam Kumar Khaire (the first director of the park), with assistance from the Pune Municipal Corporation, created the Katraj Snake Park on land that was to become the Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park.[4]
In 1997, in order to create a more modern zoo in accordance with the guidelines of the Central Zoo Authority of India, the municipality selected a site in Katraj and started developing a new zoo. The zoo opened in 1999 as the Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park & Wildlife Research Centre, and initially included only the reptile park, sambars, spotted deer, and monkeys. Although it took until 2005, all of the animals from Peshwe Park were eventually moved to the new site, and Peshwe Park was closed.[1]
The park also incorporates a rescue centre for injured and orphaned animals. It has run an animal adoption scheme since October 2010.[5]
Animals[edit]
Russell's viper
The zoo has a collection of reptiles, mammals, and birds. Among mammals, the zoo had a white tiger and has a male Bengal tiger named Tanaji. Other mammals at the zoo include leopard, sloth bears, sambhars, barking deer, blackbucks, monkeys, and elephants. Reptiles include Indian rock python, cobra, snakes, vipers, Indian crocodiles and Indian star tortoise and birds such as peafowl also feature.

The snake park has a large collection of snakes, reptiles, birds and turtles. There are over 22 species of snakes with 10 species of reptiles comprising more than 150 individuals. This includes a 13-foot-long king cobra. Information about the snakes is provided in Braille, as well as more conventional formats, and the park includes a library. The snake park has organized many snake festivals and snake awareness programs to clarify doubts and destroy fears about snakes. During Nag Panchami, the park arranges programs to discourage ill-treatment of snakes.
In April 2017, the zoo replaced the white tiger with a pair of Asiatic lions. These lions appear to have been one reason why visits to the zoo increased significantly, since the previous year.[3]
Future plans[edit]
This zoo has plans to house hyenas, foxes, barking deer, nilgais, lesser cats, jungle cats, rusty spotted cats, mouse deer and Indian giant squirrels (shekru).[6] An ex situ breeding centre is also planned by the zoo.[7]
Gallery[edit]
Russell's viper
Lion
Leopard
Indian rock python
Indian Tiger
Porcupine
Bamboo viper
Bull
Bear
Monkey
Duck
Location[edit]
Slightly outside the city proper, the park is located along the NH-48 on the banks of the Peshwa era Katraj lake, and close to Bharati Vidyapeeth University. The park is 8 km (5.0 mi) from the main city of Pune, close to the Katraj Bus Depot. PMPML buses may be obtained from Swargate. The Katraj dairy is also close by.

Look for Sarasbaug Ganpati Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Sarasbaug Ganpati Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Sarasbaug Ganpati Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Shaniwar Wada" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Shaniwar Wada
Location Pune, India
Built 1732; 292 years ago
Architectural style(s) Maratha architecture
Owner
 Maratha Empire (1732–1818)
 United Kingdom (1818–1947)
Company Raj (1818–1858)
British Raj (1858–1947)
India (1947–present)
Shaniwar Wada is a historical fortification in the city of Pune, India.
Built in 1732,[1] it was the great seat of the Peshwas of the Maratha Empire until 1818. Following the rise of the Maratha Empire, the palace became the center of Indian politics in the 18th century.[2]
The fort itself was largely destroyed in 1828 by an unexplained fire, but the surviving structures are now maintained as a tourist site.
History[edit]
An equestrian statue of Peshwa Baji Rao I, Prime Minister of the Maratha Empire, in the Shaniwar Wada complex. He was the first resident of the fortified palace.
The Shaniwar Wada was normally the seven-story capital building of the Peshwas of the Maratha Empire. It was supposed to be made entirely of stone. However, after the completion of the base floor or the first story, the people of Satara (the national capital) complained to the Chhatrapati Shahu I (Emperor) saying that a stone monument can be sanctioned and built only by the emperor himself and not the Peshwas. Following this, an official letter was written to the Peshwas stating that the remaining building had to be made of brick and not stone.
By 1758, at least a thousand people lived in the fort.
In 1773, Narayanrao, who was the fifth and ruling Peshwa then, was murdered by guards on orders of his uncle Raghunathrao and aunt Anandibai. A popular legend has it that Narayanrao's ghost still calls for help on full moon nights. Various people, working around the area, have allegedly reported the cries[3][4] of "Kaka mala vachava" (Uncle, save me) by Narayanrao Peshwa after his death.
In June 1818, the Peshwa, Bajirao II, abdicated his Gaadi (throne) to Sir John Malcolm of the British East India Company and went into political exile at Bithoor, near Kanpur in present-day Uttar Pradesh, India.
On 27 February 1828, a great fire started inside the palace complex. The conflagration raged for seven days. Only the heavy granite ramparts, strong teak gateways and deep foundations and ruins of the buildings within the fort survived.[5]
According to Haricharitramrutsagar, a biographical text of Bhagwan Swaminarayan, he had visited Shaniwarwada on the insistence of Bajirao II in 1799.[6][7][8][9][10]
Construction[edit]
The imposing walls of the Shaniwar Wada, in an 1860 photograph
Peshwa Baji Rao I, prime minister to Chattrapati Shahu, laid the ceremonial foundation of his own residence on Saturday, 10 January 1730. It was named Shaniwar Wada from the Marathi words Shaniwar (Saturday) and Wada (a general term for any residence complex). Teak was imported from the jungles of Junnar, stone was brought from the nearby quarries of Chinchwad, and Lime (mineral) was brought from the lime-belts of Jejuri. Shaniwarwada was completed in 1732, at a total cost of Rs. 16,110, a very large sum at that time.[11]
The opening ceremony was performed according to religious customs, on 22 January 1732, another Saturday chosen for being a particularly auspicious day.
Later the Peshwas made several additions, including the fortification walls, with bastions and gates; court halls and other buildings; fountains and reservoirs. Currently, the perimeter fortification wall has five gateways and nine bastion towers, enclosing a garden complex with the foundations of the original buildings. It is situated near the Mula-Mutha River, in Kasba Peth.
Fort complex[edit]
Gates[edit]
Shaniwar Wada palace's Delhi Gate or Delhi Darwaza, with its original decorations,1820
Shaniwar Wada palace fountain, the Hazari Karanje
Jharokhas at the Shaniwar wada.
A hall in the first floor above dilli darwaja (Delhi Gate)
Gardens of Shaniwar Wada
Shaniwar Wada has five gates:
Delhi Darwaza
The Delhi Darwaza is the main gate of the complex, and faces north towards Delhi. In fact, Shaniwar Wada is the only fort structure in India to have its main gate facing Delhi, the medieval imperial capital of Mughal Empire. Even Chhatrapati Shahu is said to have considered the north-facing fort an indication of Baji Rao's ambitions against the Mughal Empire, and suggested that the main gate should be made of chhaatiiche, maatiche naahi! (Marathi for "of the chests of brave soldiers, not made of mud").
The strongly built Delhi Darwaza gatehouse has massive doors, large enough to admit elephants outfitted with howdahs (seating canopies). To discourage elephants charging the gates, each pane of the gate has seventy-two sharp twelve-inch steel spikes arranged in a nine by eight grid, at approximately the height of the forehead of a battle-elephant. Each pane was also fortified with steel cross members, and borders were bolted with steel bolts having sharpened cone heads. The bastions flanking the gatehouse has arrow-loops and machicolation chutes through which boiling oil could be poured onto offending raiders. The right pane has a small man-sized door for usual entries and exits, too small to allow an army to enter rapidly. Shaniwar Wada was built by a contractor from Rajasthan known as 'Kumawat' of the Vadar Sub-caste, after completing construction they were given the name 'Naik' by the Peshwa.[citation needed]
Even if the main gates were to be forced open, a charging army would need to turn sharply right, then sharply left, to pass through the gateway and into the central complex. This would provide a defending army with another chance to attack the incoming army, and to launch a counterattack to recapture the gateway.
As the ceremonial gate of the fort, military campaigns would set out from and be received back here, with appropriate religious ceremonies.
Mastani Darwaza (Mastani's Gate) or Aliibahadur Darwaja, facing north
This gate was the entrance leading to Bajirao I's wife Mastani's palace and was used by her while travelling out of the palace's perimeter wall.[12]
Khidki Darwaza (Window Gate), facing east
Khidki Darwaja (Window Gate)
The Khidki Darwaja is named for an armoured window it contains.
Ganesh Darwaza (Ganesh Gate), facing south-east
Named for the Ganesh Rang Mahal, which used to stand near this door. It was used by ladies at the fort to visit the nearby Kasba Ganapati temple.[12]
Jambhul Darwaza or Narayan Darwaja (Narayan's Gate), facing south
This gate was used by concubines to enter and leave the fort. It obtained its second name after Narayanrao Peshwa's corpse was removed from the fort for cremation through this gate.[12] He is said to have been assassinated at this gate.[13]
Palaces[edit]
The important buildings in the palace includes the Thorlya Rayancha Diwankhana (Marathi: the court reception hall of the eldest royal, meaning Baji Rao I), Naachacha Diwankhana (Dance Hall), and Juna Arsa Mahal (Old Mirror Hall).
Since the buildings were destroyed in the fire of 1828, only descriptions of the living areas of the fort are available. All the state halls in the buildings are said to have doorways with exquisitely carved teak arches, with ornamental teardrop teak pillars shaped like Suru (cypress tree) trunks supporting the ceilings, which were covered with beautiful teak tracery, carved creepers and flowers. Exquisite glass chandeliers hung from the ceilings. The floors were made of highly polished marble, arranged in a mosaic pattern and adorned with rich Persian rugs. The walls contained paintings with scenes from the Hindu epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.
The buildings are said to have been designed and constructed by well-known artisans, including Shivaram Krishna, Devaji Sutar, Kondaji Sutar, Morarji Patharwat Bhojraja (an inlay-work expert from Jaipur) and Ragho (a painter).
It is said that the Shaniwarwada complex was seven storeys high. On the top floor was the residence of the Peshwa which was called Meghadambari. It is said that the spire of Jñāneśvar temple at Alandi, 17 km away, could be seen from there.
The Fountain[edit]
The complex had an impressive lotus-shaped fountain: the Hazari Karanje (Fountain of a thousand jets). It was constructed for the pleasure of the infant Peshwa Sawai Madhavrao. It was designed as a sixteen petal lotus; each petal had sixteen jets with an eighty-foot arch. It was the most complicated and intricate fountain of its time.[citation needed]
Shrimant Anandrao Rudrajirao Dhulap-More (an admiral of Maratha navy in 18th century) who visited the Shaniwarwada in 1791 described it as "very magnificent. A hundred dancers can dance here at a time. In one corner is a marble Ganapati statue and the palace is flanked by a fountain and a flower garden.".
Popular culture[edit]
In 2008, Shaniwar Wada was featured on The Amazing Race Asia 3. In the game show, one participant from each team of two had to find the correct pheta (turban) from among those worn by 50 men within the Wada.
It was featured in 2014 Marathi historical drama Rama Madhav.
Shaniwar Wada featured in the 2015 Hindi historical film Bajirao Mastani.
Shaniwar Wada featured in the 2019 Hindi historical film Panipat.
Shaniwar Wada featured in 2019 Marathi TV Series Swamini on Colors Marathi where grand set of Shaniwar wada was constructed in Mumbai Film City.
Gallery[edit]
Shaniwar Wada during sunset
Inside Shaniwar Wada
Statue of Bajirao I
Wada during Indian Independence Day celebrations.
Water Storage Space
Pointed main gates.
Top view of entrance to wada

For the film, see Sinhagad (film).
Sinhagad
Pune District, Maharashtra, India
Sinhagad Fort
Sinhagad
Shown within Maharashtra
Show map of Maharashtra
Show map of India
Show all
Coordinates 18°21′56.39″N 73°45′18.97″E
Type Hill Fort
Height 1,317 metres (4,321 ft)
Sinhagad is an ancient hill fortress located at around 49 km southwest of the city of Pune, India.
Previously known as Kondhana, the fort had been the site of many battles, most notably the Battle of Sinhagad in 1670.[1]
It is located in the Pune district in Maharashtra. The fort is also on the famous fort in Maharashtra which has a great history of Tanaji Malusare. The fort was captured by Tanaji Malusare and his brother. Sinhagad (Lion's Fort) fort was strategically built to provide natural protection from the enemies due to its very steep slopes. The walls of the forts and bastions were constructed only at key places. There are two gates to enter the fort named Kalyan Darwaja and Pune Darwaza. The Kalyan Darwaja is towards the southeast while the Pune Darwaza is towards north east.[2] The fort is surrounded by several other forts, and was known as the control center of the Maratha Empire. In clear weather, Rajgad, Purandar and Torna forts can be seen from the Sinhagad killa.
Geography[edit]
Perched on an isolated cliff of the Bhuleswar range in the Sahyadri Mountains, the fort is situated on a hill about 760 metres (2,490 ft) above ground and 1,317 metres (4,321 ft) above mean sea level.[3][4]
History[edit]
Sinhagad: View from the "Pune Darwaja"
Early history[edit]
Some of the information available about the fort, suggests that it could have been built 2000 years ago.[citation needed] The caves and the carvings in the Kaundinyeshwar temple stand as proofs for the same.. Also there is a Gondwana state symbol on the main gate of the fort. It has the sign of lion and elephant as well as fish. The Raj Gondian[citation needed] According to the Deccan sultanates era muslim historian Ferishta, Sinhagad fort was captured from Koli chieftain Nag Nayak in 1340 by the sultan of Delhi, Muhammad bin Tughluq.[5]
The Sinhagad Fort was initially known as "Kondhana" after the sage Kaundinya. The Kaundinyeshwar temple coupled with the caves and carvings indicates that the fort had probably been built around two thousand years ago.
The fort was captured by forces of Muhammad bin Tughluq in 1328 from Koli chieftain Nag Naik after a siege of eight months.[6][7] It then became part of the Bahmani sultanate followed by the Nizam Shahi of Ahmadnagar in 1485. After the fall of Nizam shahi it came under the control of the Adilshahi in early late 1500s.[8]
Battle for control in 17th century[edit]
The entrance to Sinhagad
Shahaji Bhosale, as the commander of Ibrahim Adil Shah II, was entrusted with the control of the Pune region. His son Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, refused to accept the Adilshahi and initiated the task of setting up Swarajya. Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj gained control of Kondana in 1647 by convincing Siddi Amber, the Adilshahi Sardar who controlled the fort, that he, the son of Shahaji Bhosale, could manage the fort's defences optimally. Bapuji Mudgal Deshpande played a key role in this activity. Adil Shah jailed Siddi Amber for this treasonous act and schemed to get it back. He imprisoned Shahaji Bhosale for a concocted crime and informed Shivaji. In 1649, Adil Shah traded the fort for Shahaji's release. Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj recaptured it in 1656 again with the help of Bapuji Mudgal Deshpande who convinced the Fort commander by giving land in the newly created Khed Shivapur village and peacefully gained control of the fort. This fort saw attacks by Mughals in 1662, 1663, and 1665. In 1664, Shaista Khan, a Mughal general, tried to bribe the people of the fort to hand it over to him but was unsuccessful.Through the Treaty of Purandar in 1665, that Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj entered into with Mughal general Mirza Raja Jai Singh I the fort passed into the Mughal hands.
Battle of Sinhagad[edit]
Main article: Battle of Sinhagad
In 1670, Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj reconquered the fort for the third time through his Koli Subedar,[9] Tanaji Malusare in Battle of Sinhagad, and the fort came and stayed under the Maratha rule till 1689 A.D.[10]
A watercolor painting of Pune dating back to the late Peshwa era by British artist, Henry Salt. The picture clearly depicts the towering Sinhagad Fort in the background
View from Sinhagad
A steep cliff leading to the fort was scaled in the dead of the night with the help of a tamed monitor lizard named "Yashwanti", colloquially known as a Ghorpad.[11][12] Thereafter, A fierce battle ensued between Tanaji and his men versus the Mughal army headed by Udaybhan Singh Rathod, a Rajput Sardar who had control of the fort. Tanaji Malusare lost his life, but his brother Suryaji took over and captured the Kondana fort, now known as Sinhagad.[13]
There is an anecdote that upon hearing of Tanaji's death, Shivaji expressed his remorse with the words, "Gad ala, pan Sinha gela" - "The Fort is conquered, but the Lion was lost".According to some, the name Sinhagad predates this event. A bust of Tanaji Malusare was established on the fort in memory of his contribution to the battle.[14]
After the death of Sambhaji, the Mughals regained control of the fort. The Marathas headed by "Sardar Balkawade", recaptured it in 1693. Rajaram I took asylum in this fort during a Mogul raid on Satara. He died at the Fort on 3 March 1700 A.D. In 1703, Aurangzeb conquered the fort. In 1706, it once again went into the hands of the Maratha's. Panaji Shivdev of Sangola, Visaji Chafer, and Shankar Narayan,the Pant Sachiv played a key role in this battle.
Peshwa era[edit]
The fort remained under Maratha's rule till the year 1817. The more than one century of the Peshwa rule saw the fort serving as a refuge from hostile forces attacking Pune, or as a place of confinement for rebels.[15] In 1817 the East India Company, general Pritzler laid siege to the fort on the orders of Mountstuart Elphinstone, the company resident in Pune at the end of Third Anglo-Maratha War and it passed into the British hands.
Culture and Tourism[edit]
A memorial commemorating Tanaji Malusare atop the Sinhgad Fort. Despite being vastly outnumbered against the Mughal Army, this brave Maratha Sardar led his forces to a decisive victory in the Battle of Sinhgad (1670 CE)
The Fort is a popular weekend destination for many residents of Pune, including trekking enthusiasts with access to the top of the fort from the base of the Sinhagad village.[16] The trek involves a one-way walk of 2.7 km (1.6 miles) over which the walker gains about 600 m (1950 feet) in elevation.
Parts of the once extensive fortification are in ruins. The fort houses a memorial to Tanaji as well as the tomb of Rajaram I. Visitors can see the military stables, a brewery and a temple of the goddess Kali (goddess) along with a Hanuman statue to the right side of the temple, as well as the historic gates. The original commemorative memorial of Tanaji Malusare has been unearthed by the restoration workers at Sinhagad Fort in Feb 2019. The stone structure was found buried under cement, concrete, and layers of oil paint and is believed to be around 350 years old.[17]
Sinhagad Fort has played a vital role in India's freedom struggle. Bal Gangadhar Tilak also known as 'The Father of Indian Unrest', used the fort as a summer retreat. It is here where Mahatma Gandhi after his return from South Africa had a historic meeting with Tilak. The bungalow has his bust at the entrance.[18]
The fort also houses a television tower for broadcasting local TV signals. Currently, Non-Vegetarian food, Partying including alcoholic beverages and smoking is banned on the fort.[19][20]
Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML) runs a bus service (bus number 50) from Shaniwar Wada to the Sinhagad foothills (Sinhagad Payatha).[21] The climbing route from either side of the fort can be covered in an hour. Shared taxi services to the base as well as the top of the fort are also available.
Sinhgad-Tanaji Malusare

Look for Sri Balaji Mandir on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Sri Balaji Mandir in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Sri Balaji Mandir" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Bagore Ki Haveli Museum on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Bagore Ki Haveli Museum in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Bagore Ki Haveli Museum" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Chetak Smarak
Memorial to the horse Chetak
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Location Balicha, Rajsamand district, Rajasthan, India
Type Memorial
Dedicated to Maharana Pratap's horse Chetak
Chetak Smarak, also called Chetak Samadhi, is a memorial to Maharana Pratap's famed steed Chetak, in the Indian state of Rajasthan. The horse died of battle wounds after helping the Rana effect a miraculous escape from the Battle of Haldighati. The memorial is said to have been built at the spot that Chetak died.[1]
It is situated in the Aravalli hills in the lake district of Rajsamand, at the village of Balicha. In 2003, the shrine was declared a Monument of National Importance in Rajasthan by the Archaeological Survey of India.[1]
It is an interesting little place with an old museum dedicated to the battle, and a new one coming up close by. It can be reached easily by road, about 4 km from the temple town of Nathdwara.

Look for City Palace Museum on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for City Palace Museum in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "City Palace Museum" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for City Palace of Udaipur on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for City Palace of Udaipur in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "City Palace of Udaipur" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Crystal Gallery on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Crystal Gallery in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Crystal Gallery" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Ekling Ji Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Ekling Ji Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Ekling Ji Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Jagdish Temple
Religion
Affiliation Hinduism
District Udaipur district
Location
Location Udaipur
State Rajasthan
Country India
Location in Udaipur
Geographic coordinates 24°34′47.4024″N 73°41′1.899″E
Not to be confused with Jag Mandir Palace.
Jagdish Temple is a large Hindu temple in the middle of Udaipur in Rajasthan, just outside the royal palace. It has been in continuous worship since 1651. A big tourist attraction, the temple was originally called the temple of Jagannath Rai but is now called Jagdish-ji. It is a major monument in Udaipur.[1]
Overview[edit]
Jagdish Temple in 1949
The Jagdish Temple is raised on a tall terrace and was completed in 1651. It attaches a double-storey Mandapa (hall) to a double-storey saandhara (with a covered ambulatory) sanctum. The mandapa has another storey tucked within its pyramidal samavarna (bellroof) while the hollow clustered spire over the sanctum contains two more, nonfunctional stories. To reach the main shrine, one must climb 32 marble steps, intercepted by a Brass image of Garuda in the end, being the mount (vahana) of God Vishnu. Shri Jagdish Temple is the most beautiful example of Hindu Iconography, consisting of three stories of hand carved stone, with a steeple nearly 79 feet high and is the largest temple of Udaipur.[2]
Part of a series on
Hinduism
Hindus History
show
Origins

show
Traditions
show
Deities
show
Concepts

show
Practices
show
Philosophical schools
show
Gurus, sants, philosophers
show
Texts
show
Society
show
Other topics

Glossary Outline
 Hinduism portal
vte
Lanes taking off from many of the sheharpanah (city wall) converge on the Jagdish Temple. The most beautiful event in the temple is the annual Rath Yatra.[3] It was built by Maharana Jagat Singh in 1651.[4] Jagdish Temple is a splendid example of either Māha Māru or Māru-Gurjara architecture,[5] decorated by beautiful and ornate carvings. A short walk from the city palace will bring you to this temple. The temple sanctum has an idol of the deity Lord Jagannath, in local parlance of God Vishnu or God Krishna, carved out of a single black stone, resplendent with four arms, flowers and finery.[6] Four smaller shrines, dedicated to Lord Ganesha, Surya, Goddess Shakti and Lord Shiva form a circle around the main shrine, housing the idol of Lord Vishnu. It is said that an estimated RS 1.5 million (or 1,500,000) ($22023. 21) was spent to construct the building in 1651.
Gallery[edit]
Elephant carvings on Jagdish Mandir
Women during a prayer
Mural Statues and Sculptures
festive decorations
Painting by John Gleich (1879 - c.1927)
Sculptures on wall. Instrument resembling Rudra veena, far left.
Sculptures of musicians and dancers.
God Shiva in the temple.
Stone inscription about the temple.


Jag Mandir
Jag Mandir with sculpture of eight elephants adorning the entrance and facing the Lake Palace
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
General information
Architectural style Rajput architecture
Town or city Udaipur
Country India
Coordinates 24.5672°N 73.6781°E
Construction started 1551
Completed Mid 17th century
Client Maharana Jagat Singh I
Owner Arvind Singh Mewar
Technical details
Structural system Yellow Sandstone and Marble
Jag Mandir is a palace built on an island in the Lake Pichola. It is also called the "Lake Garden Palace". The palace is located in Udaipur city in the Indian state of Rajasthan. Its construction is credited to three Maharanas of the Sisodia Rajputs of Mewar kingdom. The construction of the palace was started in 1551 by Maharana Amar Singh, continued by Maharana Karan Singh (1620–1628) and finally completed by Maharana Jagat Singh I (1628–1652). It is named as "Jagat Mandir" in honour of the last named Maharana Jagat Singh. The royal family used the palace as a summer resort and pleasure palace for holding parties.[1][2][3][4][5] The palace served as a refuge to asylum seekers for one occasion.[1][6]
Geography[edit]
Jag Mandir is situated in one of the two natural islands in the Pichola lake (named after the village Picholi nearby), on its southern end. The lake was initially created in the 15th century by a local banjara tribal chieftain for carrying grain across the streams. During the reign of Maharana Udai Singh II, in 1560, the lake was substantially enlarged by constructing dams across two streams. At that time, the Maharana also built the Jag Mandir and the Lake Palace (Jag Niwas Hotel) on islands in the midst of the lake. Udaipur city with its City Palace and other monuments and temples were built on the periphery of the lake.[7][8]
History[edit]
Jag Mandir Palace from above, on Lake Pichola, Udaipur. ca. 1873
The real threat, which almost decimated Mewar kingdom for many years, came from the marauding Marathas. The hope of survival revived when in 1817, the British came to their rescue with the "Treaty of Paramountcy" promising restoration of all the hereditary territories and protecting the state from any future invasions. Thereafter, peace and prosperity ensued in Mewar Kingdom. The pride and glory of Sisodia Rajputs were fully restored.[1]
During the revolt in 1857, Maharana Swroop Singh (1842–1861) saved a number of European families, mostly women and children from Neemuch, which were given refuge in the Jag Mandir Palace. The revolt was popularly known as the Sepoy Mutiny, and was also called the Indian Mutiny, (or the first War of Independence) against the British Raj.[1]
After the Independence of India from the British rule, on 15 August 1947, at the initiative of Maharana Bhupal Singh, the Mewar kingdom merged with the Indian union in 1949 along with other princely states of Rajasthan.[1]
Structure[edit]
Gul Mahal, the earliest structure before renovation
Carved statues of elephants at the jetty entry, Jag Mandir Palace.
The impressive series of structures in the three-storied Jag Mandir Palace include:
Gul Mahal, which was built first as refuge for prince Khurram;
the elegant facade flanked by four carved statues of elephants on either side at the jetty entry on the lake from Udaipur;
the Garden Courtyard and the Darikhana on its northern side;
Bara Patharon ka Mahal (palace of the 12 stones);
the Zenana Mahal – a southern extension to the Gul Mahal;
and the Kunwar Pada ka Mahal.[1][4]
Details of these structures and of the garden are elaborated below.
Gul Mahal
Gul Mahal was the first structure built in 1551, during the reign of Maharana Amar Singh, which was further developed during the reign of Maharana Jagat Singh to house the Mughal Prince Khurram. It was initially a small sandstone (yellow sandstone) palace with an imposing dome (which gives the appearance of a crown). The crescent of Islam is fixed on top of this dome. The Gul Mahal has three circular domed chambers, one above the other. Entry to these chambers is from a columned hall. Two marble chhatris with sloping cornices rise above the main façade. The massive marble slabs affixed to the interior walls were inlaid with coloured rubies, onyx, jasper, cornelian and jade. This type of decoration is reported to have been replicated by the Mughals in their Tomb of I'timād-ud-Daulah at Agra, in 1626. The palace is also said to have housed a throne carved from a single block of serpentine, which has not been traced. The Mahal is surrounded by a roomy circular apartment built in white and black marble with murals and paintings considered an uncommon feature in Rajput architecture. On the western wing of the palace, this type of design has been repeated in three other pavilions.[1][2][9]
Jag Mandir
Jag Mandir is the main palace, which incorporates the Gul Mahal. The towers of the palace at the corners are octagonal in shape and are topped with cupolas. A labyrinth of reception halls, residential suites, and internal courts were built inside the palace, all in Rajput and Mughal architectural styles. The Zenana (residence of royal ladies chambers) adjoins the palace. The Kunwar Pada ka Mahal (the Palace of the Crown Prince) is located at the western end.[1][10][11]
Entry pavilion
The pavilion at the entry to the palace is an impressive white colonnade of cusped arches. The landing jetty is also located for docking of boats arriving from the jetty of Bansi Ghat on the mainland near City Palace in Udaipur. The cruise is through the Pichola Lake. The pavilion is decorated with large elephants carved in stone, four on each side of the entry steps. They face the Lake Palace. The trunks of these elephants were damaged and replaced with polystyrene. The pavilion marks the perimeter of the island in the scenic backdrop of the Aravalli hills.[1][6][12]
Garden
The flower garden in the palace complex is set up in the large Garden Courtyard. It has yew bushes, jasmine, frangipani trees, bougainvillea, palm trees, nasturtiums, verbena and moss rose. The courtyard itself is covered with black and white tiles. Fountains and water pools, crisscrossed by walkways with low marble handrails, bedeck the garden surroundings. The present Maharana hosts lavish parties here and also rents the place for private parties.[1][9]
Darikhana
Darikhana is on the northern side of the palace, which is an open-sided terrace built with marble columns. This place is now run as a restaurant by the present Maharana.[1]
Bara Patharon ka Mahal
Bara Patharon ka Mahal is located at the eastern wing of the main palace. Mahal is so named because twelve solid marble slabs have been used in its construction.[1] Hence, it is also known as the "Palace of the Twelve Stones".[1]
Visitor information[edit]
The Jag Mandir is approached only by boat from the Bansi Ghat jetty next to the Lake Palace in Udaipur.
In popular culture[edit]
The 1983 James Bond film, Octopussy featured the Jag Mandir as one of its main locations.
Gallery[edit]
An aerial view of Jag Mandir
Engraving of the Jag Mandir palace, 1829
Full View of Island palace Jagmandir, 1910
Closer view of the Jagmandir with the Gul Mahal at the back
Jag Mandir Palace from above, on Lake Pichola, Udaipur.
Gul Mahal, Jag Mandir Palace.

Lake Pichola
Lake Pichola
Location of Lake Pichola in Rajasthan
Show map of Rajasthan
Show map of India
Show all
Location Rajasthan
Coordinates 24.572°N 73.679°E
Lake type Freshwater Lake
Catchment area 55 km2 (21 sq mi)
Basin countries India
Managing agency Arvind Singh Mewar
Max. length 4 km (2.5 mi)
Max. width 3 km (1.9 mi)
Surface area 696 ha (1,720 acres)
Average depth 4.32 m (14.2 ft)
Max. depth 8.5 m (28 ft)
Water volume 13.08 million cubic metres (462×106 cu ft)
Islands Jag Niwas, the Jag Mandir and Arsi Vilas
Settlements Udaipur
Lake Pichola, situated in Udaipur city in the Indian state of Rajasthan, is an artificial fresh water lake, created in the year 1362, named after the nearby Picholi village.[1][2] It is one of the several contiguous lakes, and developed over the last few centuries in and around the famous Udaipur city. The lakes around Udaipur were primarily created by building dams to meet the drinking water and irrigation needs of the city and its neighbourhood. Two islands, Jag Niwas and Jag Mandir are located within Pichola Lake, and have been developed with several palaces to provide views of the lake.[1][3]
There are four islands on the lake:
Jag Niwas, where the Lake Palace is built.
Jag Mandir, with the palace of the same name.
Mohan Mandir, from where the king would watch the annual Gangaur festival celebration.
Arsi Vilas, small island which was an ammunition depot, but also a small palace. This one was built by one of the Maharanas of Udaipur to enjoy the sunset on the lake. It is also a sanctuary catering to a variety of birds, including tufted ducks, coots, egrets, terns, cormorants and kingfishers.
Three of the numerous lakes found in the vicinity of Udaipur which connect with the Pichola lake and the Swaroop Sagar Lake connected by an arched bridge built by Maharana Swaroop Singh (1842-1861) which in turn connects to the Fateh Sagar Lake, the crystal watered lake in the midst of tree lined hills and the smaller Arsi Vilas.[1][3]
Access[edit]
Further information: Udaipur
Lake Pichola is approachable by road from Udaipur City. Local buses, Tongas, auto-rickshaws and taxis provide the needed transport. The lake is adjacent to the Bagore Ki Haveli[4] museum, making it a good landmark. Udaipur, in turn, is well connected through the Golden Quadrilateral road network, and it lies equidistant, at 650 kilometres, from Delhi and Mumbai on the National Highway (NH) 8. Jaipur, the capital of Rajasthan is 6 hours by road and a 3.5 hours drive from Ahmedabad to Udaipur. Rajasthan Tourism operates a regular bus service from Delhi. It also falls on the East-West Corridor which starts from Porbandar and ends at Silchar and intersects the Golden Quadrilateral and a part of this is the stretch from Udaipur to Chittor. 24 km from the lake is the Dabok Airport which connects to Delhi and Bombay. Udaipur Railway Station and Maharana Pratap Bus Stand are both 3 km away from the Lake.
History[edit]
Pichola Lake was built in 1362 AD. It is a hearsay that it was built by a banjara (gypsy) and it got its name from nearby village Picholi, during the reign of Maharana Lakha.[5] Later, Maharana Udai Singh, impressed by the charm of this lake with the backdrop of green hills, founded the city of Udaipur on the banks of the lake and also enlarged the Lake by constructing a stone masonry dam in the Badipol region on the shore of the Lake.[1]
Udaipur Panorama from Jag Mandir Island
The lake's surroundings and the several islands within the lake have been developed over the centuries, with palaces, marble temples, family mansions, bathing ghats or chabutaras (a raised platform, normally within a courtyard); some of the famous ones are the Lake Palace (now converted into a heritage hotel) in the middle of the lake also called the Pichola Palace (pictured) or Jag Nivas located on the Jag Island, the Jag Mandir, the Mohan Mandir (in the northeast corner of the lake built by Jagat Singh between 1628 and 1652), the City Palace of Udaipur (Bansi Ghat) from where boats ply to all other parts of the Lake, the Arsi Vilas Island, which is a sanctuary for birds and the Sitamata Game Sanctuary on the western shore of the Lake.[3][6]
At several locations where the lake narrows, ornamental arch bridges have been built to span the waterway between the banks.[3][7]
Hydrology and technical details[edit]
The Sisarma stream, a tributary of the Kotra River, drains a catchment of 55 km2 from the Aravalli Mountains and contributes to the flows in the lake.[8] The average annual rainfall in the lake basin is 635 millimetres (25.0 in). The lake has a surface area of about 696 ha. It is 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) long and 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) wide, and has depth varying from a minimum of 4.32 metres (14.2 ft) to a maximum of 8.5 metres (28 ft). In the heart of the Lake, a palace called the Lake Palace was built, which is now converted into a heritage palace hotel. This palace built in marble in 1746 by Maharana Jagat Singh II, 62nd successor to the royal dynasty of Mewar, spreads across the 1.6 hectares (4.0 acres) island and is claimed to be as impressive as the Taj Mahal. At the southern end, a dam was built across the major tributary to facilitate the Banjara tribesman to ford the stream with animals carrying grains. After 1560, Maharana Udai Sing II strengthened the dam (to a height of 15.24 m) when he established the city of Udaipur around the picturesque Lake. Machchala Magra hill, to the south of the city palace complex, is part of the old city wall and the small fort of Eklinggarh and the temple.[3][6][9][10] The fact that the Pichola lake was built by nomadic gypsies testifies that the rulers of Mewar encouraged people to build water harvesting structures.[11]
During drought conditions because of lower rainfall & degradation of the catchment the lake becomes dry (pictured). During the years 1998 to July 2005. the Lakes of Udaipur were reportedly dry.[8]
Udaipur Panorama with dried Lake Pichola
Water quality[edit]
According to a study carried out by the "Centre of Advanced Study in Geology", Punjab University, the water quality of the lake has a high sodium and Bicarbonate content, which is attributed to the continental weathering due to anthropogenic pressure (tourist influx), intense development activities in the basin area and untreated effluent from municipal and domestic sewage into the Lake. The semi arid conditions of the area, saline and alkaline soils/groundwater conditions and weathering of the silicate rock exposed in the drainage basin are assessed as the reasons for the supply of major ions. The report infers[12] that
The increase in phosphate loading and consequent depletion of silica suggests biological consumption of the latter. The observed chemical data of the Pichola Lake was used to predict the mineral assemblages in the carbonate and aluminosilicate system. It demonstrates that calcite and dolomite are the possible minerals that are in equilibrium with the lake water system and that the lake water chemistry is in the range of stability of kaolinite
The average of the pollution parameters recorded at random intervals during 2005-2006 as reported by the Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board in 2006 are:[13]
Dissolved Oxygen 6.33 mg/L; pH Value No.8.27; BOD 2.66 mg/L; Nitrate 0.11 mg/L; Nitrite 0.0045 mg/L; Fecal Coliform 16 MPN/100; and Total Coliform 110 MPN/100.
The assessment of quality status determined that water is polluted and needs remedial measures to be implemented to rectify the situation.[13]
Studies conducted by Jheel Sanrakshan Samiti (Udaipur Lake Conservation Society) – JSS - a Non Governmental Organization (NGO) set up in 1992 for Ecological, Limnological and Hydrological Conservation of Udaipur Lake System, has found growth of water hyacinth, the lake bottom is also covered with a thick mat of submerged vegetation, presence of floating micro algae which are detrimental to the public health, and also harbor varieties of harmful organisms. This degree of pollution makes chlorination and treatment by other chemicals ineffective to render the water potable.[8]
Threats to the lake[edit]
Some of the issues identified as causes for deterioration of the Lake environment[14] are:
Polluted due to disposal of sewerage directly into surface drains or surface water body
Large-scale and uncontrolled mining of marble and other minerals leading to heavy deforestation of hill slopes.
Catchment area degradation and soil erosion causing deposition of sediments into the Lake and disturbance to the ecosystem of the area.
Encroachments
Dumping of solid, liquid waste, destruction of submergence areas and over exploitation of water
Poor governance
Lack of citizens and stakeholders participation in management of the Lake
Due to deteriorated water quality, out of 42 species of fishes including Mahseer and all major carp fishes only 17 species of fishes have survived.
Lake restoration works[edit]
Steps undertaken to restore the lakes by the NGOs, such as JSS and concerned government organizations are:[8]
Water hyacinth has been eradicated
Biological measures undertaken
Sewerage plan has been partly implemented.
Catchment area conservation of the Pichhola Watershed project of Rs 34.2 million covering an area of 12702 ha under funding of the Government of India is under implementation
List of Lakes in India[edit]
List of lakes in India
Gallery[edit]
City Palace on Lake Pichola
Ghats on the lake
Jag Mandir on Lake Pichola.
Sunset at Pichola lake, seen from Karni Mata Temple
Boats floating in Lake Pichola, and Jag Mandir in background, in a typical cloudy day in rainy season.
Boats at the lake.
Lake Palace on Lake Pichola.

Look for Maharana Pratap Memorial on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Maharana Pratap Memorial in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Maharana Pratap Memorial" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Monsoon Palace
Monsoon Palace of Udaipur on the hill top
Location within Rajasthan
Show map of Rajasthan
Show map of India
Show all
General information
Architectural style Rajput Architecture
Town or city Udaipur
Country India
Coordinates 24.594°N 73.639°E
Construction started 1884
Completed Nineteenth century
Client Mewar dynasty
Owner Government of India
Technical details
Structural system Marble and masonry
Design and construction
Architect(s) Maharana Sajjan Singh
Front Entrance
The Monsoon Palace, also known as the Sajjan Garh Palace, is a hilltop palatial residence in the city of Udaipur, Rajasthan in India, overlooking the Fateh Sagar Lake. It is named Sajjangarh after Maharana Sajjan Singh (1874–1884) of the Mewar dynasty, whom it was built for in 1884. The palace offers a panoramic view of the city's lakes, palaces and surrounding countryside. It was built chiefly to watch the monsoon clouds; hence, appropriately, it is popularly known as Monsoon Palace. It is said that the Maharana built it at the top of the hill to get a view of his ancestral home, Chittorgarh. Previously owned by the Mewar royal family, it is now under the control of the Forest Department of the Government of Rajasthan and has recently been opened to the public. The palace provides a beautiful view of the sunset.[1][2][3][4][5][6][7]
Its builder, Maharana Sajjan Singh, originally planned to make it a five-storey astronomical centre. The plan was cancelled with Maharana Sajjan Singh's premature death. It was then turned into a monsoon palace and hunting lodge.[8]
High in the Aravalli Hills, just outside Udaipur, the palace is illuminated in the evenings, giving a golden orange glow (see image in the infobox).[9] The palace appeared in the 1983 James Bond film Octopussy as the residence of Kamal Khan (Portrayed by Louis Jourdan), an exiled Afghan prince.
History[edit]
The history of the palace reflects the history of the Mewar kingdom. Maharana Sajjan Singh, (b. 18 July 1859 d. 23 December 1884), the initial builder of the Monsoon Palace was the seventy–second ruler of the Mewar dynasty (1874–1884) and ruled from Udaipur for a short period of 10 years until his untimely death. The Mewar dynasty traces its history to Guhil, who founded the Mewar State in 568 AD.[7] Sajjan Singh came to the throne when he was 15 years old. However, his uncle Sohan Singh challenged his right to the crown and even plotted through astrologers, who said the timing for the coronation was not appropriate. Fortunately for him the then British agent, who was in favour of Sajjan Singh, intervened and persuaded the astrologers to give a favourable date for the crowning. The eventual Coronation of Sajjan Singh took place two years after this. As the trouble-maker uncle was still persisting with his obstructions towards the newly crowned Maharana, his property was confiscated and he was eventually imprisoned.
After he was invested in 1876 as Maharana, he was considered an enlightened ruler and a "man of vision"[by whom?], he launched a massive programme of developmental activities in his kingdom, in particular, enlarging infrastructure facilities such as roads, water supply and other civil works. He also introduced civil administration and courts. He also improved the general environment of Udaipur by afforestation and lake improvements. He had Lake Pichola desilted and the masonry dam re-built to improve storage capacity, as well as preserving the historical heritage in line with his personal interest in the arts and culture. The most ambitious project he undertook was building the Sajjan Garh Palace, or the Monsoon Palace, as a western backdrop to Udaipur city.
It was during Sajjan Singh's rule that Udaipur gained recognition as the second Municipality in India, after Bombay. In recognition of his outstanding achievements in preserving and developing the Mewar kingdom, and to remind him that his was a princely state under the British Raj, he was conferred the title of "Grand Commander of the Star of India" in November 1881 by Lord Ripon, on the occasion of Queen Victoria's crowning as the Empress of India.[7]
Structure[edit]
Monsoon Palace
The palace, built with white marble, is located on Bansdara peak of the Aravalli hill range at an elevation of 944 m (3100 ft) above mean sea level, overlooking Lake Pichola from the west about 1,100 ft (340 m) below the palace. The intention of the original planner, Maharana Sajjan Singh, was to build a nine-storey complex, basically as an astronomical centre and to keep track of the movement of monsoon clouds in the area surrounding the palace, and also to provide employment to people. It was also meant to serve as a resort for the royal family. Unfortunately, the Maharana died prematurely at the age of 26 (after only 10 years of rule between 1874 and 1884), which resulted in the shelving of his plans for some time. Before his death, he had built it partially, and it was subsequently completed by his successor king Maharana Fateh Singh who used it to watch the monsoon clouds. The royal family also used this building as a hunting lodge.[1][3][6][7][9] The white marble palace has high turrets and guards regulating each of the towers. The palace has a grand central court with a staircase and many rooms and quarters. The palace is built on marble pillars, which are carved with exquisite motifs of leaves and flowers. The walls are plastered with lime mortar. At night, the illuminated palace with the Rajasthani architecture comprising domes, fountains and jharokas gives it a "fairy tale beauty".[tone][3][10]
A unique water harvesting structure to collect rainwater in an underground cistern, with a storage capacity of 195,500 litres, exists in the precincts of the palace. In spite of this, the water supply was found to be inadequate and the palace was therefore abandoned.[10][11]
Other attractions[edit]
View of Udaipur city from the Monsoon Palace
Sajjangarh Wildlife Sanctuary, which encircles the palace, was established in 1987. It covers an area of 5.19 square kilometres (2.00 sq mi). It is now a well-protected sanctuary, with the Kishan Pol concrete wall surrounding it. The hillside is thickly wooded and the former rulers maintained this area as a royal shooting preserve. When Udaipur was attacked by the Scindias in 1764, the hill was used as an ordnance dump; some cannons still remain.[12]
The palace overlooks the sanctuary, which is a reserve for reptiles, tigers, nilgai, sambhar deer, wild boars, hyenas, panthers, and jackals. It is also popular for bird watching.[12][13] The reserve can also be approached by a trek (as an adventure) starting from the Gorilla Point to the Jiyan Sagar or the Bari Lake, to view the Aravalli hills and the wildlife of the reserve forest.[tone][12]
In popular culture[edit]
Monsoon Palace
The Monsoon Palace was used as a location for the filming of the 1983 James Bond film, Octopussy. It appears as the residence of the principal villain, an exiled Afghan prince named Kamal Khan (Louis Jourdan).[14] Sequences shot at the palace include a 'tiger' hunt on elephants where James Bond (Roger Moore) escapes from the palace and is pursued into the jungle and the finale, complete with a battle in the courtyard and an escape by Union Jack hot-air balloon. Other footage in the film was shot at Shiv Niwas Palace and the Lake Palace Hotel.[14] However, scenes showing Bond eating dinner inside the palace, running between rooms, sliding down the grand staircase and finally a basement rendezvous for the villains in the film, were not shot inside the Monsoon Palace, nor were the sets for those sequences based on the layout or features of the Monsoon Palace. In 2008 The Cheetah Girls filmed the song "Dance Me If You Can", for their Indian movie, at the palace.[15]
Visitor information[edit]
This section is written like a manual or guide. Please help rewrite this section and remove advice or instruction. (November 2023)
The Monsoon Palace is 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) west of Udaipur and overlooks Lake Pichola. The palace can be accessed by a winding road through the surrounding Sajjan Singh Sanctuary by taxi or 'auto rickshaw'. The palace and the Sajjan Singh Sanctuary are major attractions and are open to visitors until sunset.[3] A boat ride across Lake Pichola in Udaipur provides views of the palace and allows visitors to view the palace.[tone][11] Udaipur is well connected by road and air links to all parts of the country.
Gallery[edit]
Remote view of Sajjangarh Palace
Udaipur view from Sajjangarh fort
Window at Sajjangarh fort, udaipur
Udaipur view from Sajjangarh fort
Sajjangarh fort sidewall
interior facade, Monsoon Palace
Sajjangarh fort, Udaipur

Look for Sahelion Ki Bari on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Sahelion Ki Bari in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Sahelion Ki Bari" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Shilpgram
Shilpgram, Ranthambhore
Location within Rajasthan
Established 2013
Location Ramsinghpura, Sawai Madhopur, India
Coordinates 26.01733°N 76.50257°E
Type Craft Village
Curator ACCESS Development Services
The Shilpgram Museum is a craft village, situated near Ramsinghpura village, 9 km from Sawai Madhopur in India. It is a living ethnographic museum depicting the tremendous diversity in crafts, art and culture of various Indian states, especially the western part.
Description[edit]
The foundation stone-laying ceremony of Shilpgram, Sawai Madhopur, Rajasthan, was done by Bina Kak, former Hon'ble Tourism, Art, Culture, Forest and Environment Minister of Rajasthan on 26 April 2013.[1]
Shilpgram got renovated in 2017 and is being an attractive destination for tourists where the local crafts lure the tourist to spend some time in the tranquility of Ranthambhore. Spreading over 22 acres in land, Shilpgram is a platform where regional handicraft and hand-loom products is developed. Like other Shilpgrams, for example, Udaipur Shilpgram, tourist interest as well as public utility exhibitions and craft bazaars of handicrafts and handlooms are organized by Shilpgram. Sometimes to showcase their regional cultural heritage, they also organize cultural events.[2]

Look for Srinathji Temple on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Srinathji Temple in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Srinathji Temple" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Look for Vintage Collection of Classic Cars Museum on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:
Wiktionary (dictionary)
Wikibooks (textbooks)
Wikiquote (quotations)
Wikisource (library)
Wikiversity (learning resources)
Commons (media)
Wikivoyage (travel guide)
Wikinews (news source)
Wikidata (linked database)
Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Vintage Collection of Classic Cars Museum in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Vintage Collection of Classic Cars Museum" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:
If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
